People & Organizational Performance Practice The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era Companies are moving toward a new paradigm of humans working together with virtual and physical AI agents to create value. We share lessons from early adopters—and what you can do next. This article is a collaborative effort by Alexander Sukharevsky, Alexis Krivkovich, Arne Gast, Arsen Storozhev, Dana Maor, Deepak Mahadevan, Lari Hämäläinen, and Sandra Durth, representing views from McKinsey’s People & Organizational Performance Practice, McKinsey Technology, and QuantumBlack, AI by McKinsey. September 2025 AI is bringing the largest organizational paradigm shift since the industrial and digital revolutions (see sidebar, “The evolution of operating models”). This new paradigm unites humans and AI agents—both virtual and physical—to work side by side at scale at near-zero marginal cost. We call it the agentic organization. McKinsey’s experience working with early adopters indicates that AI agents can unlock significant value. Organizations are beginning to deploy virtual AI agents along a spectrum of increasing complexity: from simple tools that augment existing activities to end-to-end workflow automation to entire “AI-first” agentic systems. In parallel, physical AI agents are emerging. Companies are making strides in developing “bodies” for AI, such as smart devices, drones, self- driving vehicles, and early attempts at humanoid robots. These machines allow AI to interface with the physical world. The evolution of operating models In the agricultural era prior to the mirrored industrial thinking, hard-coding The promise of this new paradigm will 1800s, operating models were simple business processes into monolithic depend upon the continued growth of and centered around small teams of systems supporting production and AI’s capabilities, as well as other factors craftspeople and farmers. Eighty to enterprise resource planning. Companies such as regulation. The length of tasks 90 percent of the global population soon shifted to modular digital products that AI can reliably complete doubled worked in agriculture.1 and platforms, updated monthly or even approximately every seven months since daily.3 Speed required agile operating 2019 and every four months since 2024, Next, in the industrial era, people moved models with small, cross-functional teams, reaching roughly two hours as of this into factories, and operating models including new roles such as software writing.7 AI systems could potentially shifted to functional hierarchies. Products engineers, experience designers, and complete four days of work without were designed for mass replication product managers. Speed and customer supervision by 2027. This would be a by people and machines, with major access became the keys to companies’ phenomenally accelerated evolution— upgrades every three to ten years. New competitive advantage. Today, 5.8 percent from an intern-level employee requiring roles emerged, such as factory workers, of the US population is employed in tech constant supervision to a mid-tenure engineers, and shift supervisors. By jobs,4 with only 1.6 percent in agriculture5 employee who can operate independently the 1970s, 39 percent of people in the and 19.3 percent in the industrial sector.6 to, perhaps, a senior executive who can United States worked in the industrial shape and drive strategies. sector, with just 4 percent in agriculture.2 Now, the AI era is beginning to usher in Efficient scaling drove companies’ growth the newest evolution, revolutionizing Organizational paradigms do coexist. But and competitive advantage, and lean knowledge work like the previous eras the agentic organization may offer the management became a strategic tool. revolutionized physical work, with the key for the leaders to gain a competitive agentic organization bringing together advantage by building decentralized As the digital era launched in the 1990s, humans, AI agents, and machines in the outcomes-focused agentic networks. industrial-age maxims began crumbling workplace of the future. with the rise of computing. Early IT efforts 1 Marian L. Tupy and Ronald Bailey, “The changing nature of work,” Human Progress, March 1, 2023. 2 Victor R. Fuchs, Economic growth and the rise of service employment, National Bureau of Economic Research working paper, number 486, June 1980. 3 Eiki Takeuchi, “Why Amazon releases every 11.6 seconds,” Medium, May 11, 2025. 4 State of the tech workforce 2025, CompTIA, July 1, 2025. 5 Data 360 Database, “Employment by sector (%),” World Bank, accessed August 2025. 6 Data 360 Database, “Employment by sector (%),” World Bank, accessed August 2025. 7 “Measuring AI ability to complete long tasks,” METR, accessed September 2025. The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era 2 The agentic organization will be built around five pillars of the enterprise: business model; operating model; governance; workforce, people, and culture; and technology and data (Exhibit 1). Imagine, for instance, the bank of tomorrow: When a customer wants to buy a house, a personal AI concierge activates a series of agentic workflows to serve the buyer. A real estate AI agent suggests properties, while a mortgage underwriting agent tailors offers based on the customer’s financial profile. Compliance agents ensure that the deal adheres to bank policies, and a contracting agent finalizes agreements before another agent fulfills the loan. All these workflows are overseen by an agentic team of human supervisors, mortgage experts, and AI-empowered frontline employees. In some cases, the bank could even extend its AI-powered services into furnishing, renovations, energy upgrades, and more. The bank becomes a network of agentic teams—an agentic organization. Web <2025> E<AxgheinbtiictA 1I3> Exhibit <1> of <3> AI is leading the largest organizational paradigm shift since the Industrial and Digital Revolutions. Core elements of organizational paradigms, by era Dominant period 1800 2000 1800 2000 1800 2000 1800 2000 Era Craft and agriculture Industrial Digital AI Business Agricultural and artisan prod- Manufactured goods via physical Digital channels and products, AI-native channels and products, model ucts via direct channels, eg, channels, eg, cars, washing eg, e-commerce platforms, eg, personal concierges local bread, tailored clothes machines, mass-market soap banking apps, social media, Real-time personalization and Centuries to change 3–10 years between major software as a service (SaaS) innovation standard designs upgrades Daily or monthly product AI-first workflows fueled by Human creation and Linear, repeatable business releases proprietary multimodal data delivery processes Digital journeys with analytics Operating Teams of farm workers or Functional hierarchies with large Cross-functional teams of knowl- Flat networks of hybrid agentic model skilled individuals (artisans), front line for repetitive tasks, edge workers aligned to prod- teams structured to drive end-to- with knowledge transfer from small white-collar teams for ucts, projects, and segments, end outcomes master to apprentice management and engineering with digitally enabled front line Governance Local planning and direct Rigid plans, waterfall delivery, and Iterative product delivery, Real-time, embedded governance governance manual governance quarterly realignment, and agile and agentic controls with human governance accountability Workforce, Deep specialization and cul- Narrowly specialized functional Knowledge workers with Hybrid workforce with T-shaped and people, and ture of craftsmanship talent working in a culture of T-shaped talent profiles M-shaped human talent profiles culture planning working in a culture of Culture of continuous change and experimentation learning Technology Hand tools and animals to Machines and harnessed energy PC, mobile, cloud, industrial Sensors, humanoid robots, drones, and data help humans IT “monoliths” (eg, enterprise robots, etc etc Handwritten notebooks and resource planning, mainframes) Modular systems, (micro-) Democratized AI mesh with modular ledgers owned by (outsourced) IT depart- services and APIs owned by AI agents, agent-to-agent communi- ments with manual software (in-house) cross-functional cation, and dynamic sourcing delivery teams with semiautomated Peta/exabytes of unstructured Gigabytes of structured opera- delivery multimodal tacit data tional and financial data in data Tera/petabytes of semistruc- warehouses tured data for advanced analytics in data lakes Iconic Bread, artisan clothes and Ford, GE, Toyota Google, Spotify, Facebook Leadership in the era still open examples shoes, art McKinsey & Company The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era 3 In this article, we share early signals from our work with pioneering companies, insights from tech leaders and investors, and the questions executives are asking us. The agentic organization paradigm will undoubtedly evolve, but today’s leaders cannot wait for perfect clarity. In this article, we point leaders to where they can act now to shape the new era—refining their operating models to create more value and rewiring for an AI-first approach—instead of waiting to be shaped by it. Five pillars of the agentic organization 1. Business model In the agentic era, companies will gain a competitive advantage by getting closer to customers via AI channels to offer real-time hyperpersonalization, streamlining processes to become AI-first, and building a walled garden of proprietary data as their superpower. AI-native start-ups and agentic companies can potentially disrupt industries, with a fundamentally different level of productivity (revenue per employee), cost decoupled from growth, and greater speed to market and innovation. AI-native channels enable hyperpersonalization Consumers are already bypassing shops, apps, and search engines in favor of AI-native interfaces such as ChatGPT. In the future, every consumer could have a low-cost AI personal assistant. One European utility provider has rolled out a multimodal AI assistant to its three million customers. It significantly reduced average handling times, boosted customer satisfaction, improved response speed, and resolved more calls without a human. These assistants won’t just respond; they are personal concierges that will negotiate with other agents 24/7, continuously learning from user behavior and market signals to generate ever-evolving, hyperpersonalized products. This also unlocks new opportunities for the ecosystem economy, in which companies that own customer contact can grow by meeting various customer needs beyond their traditional business model and industry boundaries. AI-first workflows drive marginal costs toward the cost of compute Banks already run mortgage and compliance processes with agent squads. Insurers are reinventing claims and underwriting, while reimagining themselves as AI-native. Telcos are using agents in customer service and beyond. One global bank’s “agent factory” manages know-your- customer processes with ten agent squads, which has helped achieve a substantial positive impact on the quality and consistency of output. Another bank has used humans to oversee squads of AI agents in modernizing its legacy core systems, enabling up to 50 percent reductions in time and effort. This is not automation as usual on top of existing processes—it’s a redesign of end-to-end processes with humans “above the loop” for strategic oversight, with potential to bring the marginal cost toward the cost of compute. Going forward, most, if not all, processes can be reimagined as AI-first, with humans and traditional IT systems selectively introduced back in the loop or above the loop. Proprietary data becomes a key differentiator If today’s AI is “an intern with the internet in its pocket,” tomorrow’s edge will come from the walled data gardens that the public internet doesn’t offer. Companies can outperform their competition by continuously capturing and refining unique, consented, proprietary data—such as streams of customer behavior, product usage, and sensor data—and converting them into differentiating personalized products and processes. AI can also help by accelerating the build- up of data foundations and data products, as well as data-quality improvements. The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era 4 2. Operating model In the agentic era, how organizations are built and operate will evolve as much as the products or services they deliver. Work and workflows will be reimagined as AI-first, and operating models will evolve to flat networks of empowered, outcome-aligned agentic teams. Work and workflows will be reimagined as AI-first The operating model of the agentic era will be anchored around reimagined AI-first workflows, with humans and IT systems selectively reintroduced in AI-native design. At a European automaker and a public sector organization, squads of agents are reverse-engineering and modernizing legacy systems while humans steer and validate work. In product development, agents can gather feedback, analyze data, test features, and even run campaigns. Humans will be mostly positioned above the loop to steer and direct outcomes and selectively within the loop where human contact matters. Outcome-aligned agentic teams will be organizational building blocks Traditional organizations have been built around functional silos. Digital companies have cross- functional product teams but are still constrained by handovers and human team size limitations, such as the two-pizza team1 and Dunbar’s number.2 In the agentic organization, structure will pivot to small, outcome-focused agentic teams. An agentic team—a smaller group of multidisciplinary humans who own and supervise the underlying AI workflows—can be organized to deliver clear end-to-end business outcomes covering the full functional value chain of marketing, product management, technology, data, and operations. In our experience, a human team of two to five people can already supervise an agent factory of 50 to 100 specialized agents running an end-to-end process such as onboarding a customer, launching a product, or closing the books. Agentic AI can extend the scope and autonomy of a product team more than ever. Winners orchestrate flat networks of agentic teams Proliferation of AI agents without the right context, steering, and orientation can be a recipe for chaos. Winning operating models of the future will empower agentic teams, with flat decision and communication structures that operate with high context sharing and alignment across agentic teams to ensure they move in sync. Organization charts (based on traditional hierarchical delegation) will pivot toward agentic networks or work charts (based on exchanging tasks and outcomes).3 Finally, agentic networks are not necessarily limited to the boundaries of a single organization, and different outcomes may be sourced from different parties, opening up new B2B opportunities. 3. Governance In the agentic organization, governance cannot remain a periodic, paper-heavy exercise. As agents operate continuously, governance must become real time, data driven, and embedded— with humans holding final accountability. Decision-making accelerates with real-time data Traditional budgeting, planning, and performance management cycles are too slow for AI-first workflows. Early movers are experimenting with “agentic budgeting,” in which AI agents propose budgets, scenario agents run forecasts, and reporting agents provide real-time insights. Finance 1 Martin Fowler, “Two pizza team,” MartinFowler.com, July 25, 2023. 2 “Dunbar’s number, psychological safety and team size,” Psych Safety, October 21, 2022. 3 2025: The year the frontier firm is born, Microsoft, April 23, 2025. The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era 5 leaders shift from collecting spreadsheets to interpreting signals, stress-testing scenarios, and engaging directly with the business. Agents control agents through embedded guardrails Just as DevSecOps (development, security, and operations) embedded automated checks into digital delivery, agentic organizations will embed control agents into workflows. Critic agents will challenge outputs, guardrail agents will enforce policy, and compliance agents will monitor regulation. Every action can be logged and explained in real time—from data privacy to financial thresholds to brand voice. An AI governance framework across the life cycle of AI agents—from agent discovery and initiation to decommissioning—can balance speed and scale with the required security and control mechanisms. Human accountability and oversight remain Human accountability and oversight will remain essential, but their nature will change. Rather than conduct line-by-line reviews, compliance officers and leaders will define policies, monitor outliers, and adjust the level of human involvement. The challenge is finding the sweet spot: enough oversight to manage risk without pulling agents back to human speed. Companies that get this balance right will capture more of the agentic advantage. Ultimately, the scale of agentic adoption will be capped by how much oversight capacity humans can provide—making governance itself a potential bottleneck to productivity. 4. Workforce, people, and culture In the agentic organization, humans will move from executing activities to owning and steering end-to-end outcomes. That shift demands new profiles with different skills and a culture that provides cohesion and purpose. The hybrid agentic workforce needs a new talent system As agents take on execution, people will increasingly define goals, make trade-offs, and steer outcomes. This will change how companies plan for a hybrid workforce, whom they hire (or borrow), how they deploy human or AI talent, and how they measure success. HR systems not only track human employees but also are a repository of agents and agentic workflows. Performance management anchored in task completion will give way to systems that track how well people orchestrate agents, unlock value, and deliver outcomes. In this new paradigm, the talent system itself must be rethought—from career paths to incentives to leadership models. New talent profiles with different skills emerge In our work with pioneering organizations, we see AI agents replacing tasks historically handled by knowledge workers, such as analyzing documents and creating APIs. At the same time, we see rising demand for other skills—for example, deep problem-solving with an end-to-end lens, application of system design, and the ability to apply pattern recognition to edge cases where agents fail. Three roles are emerging as humans work alongside agents (Exhibit 2): — M-shaped supervisors: broad generalists fluent in AI, orchestrating agents and the hybrid workforce across domains — T-shaped experts: deep specialists who reimagine workflows, handle exceptions, and safeguard quality The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era 6 Web <2025> E<AxgheinbtiictA 2I3> Exhibit <for pdf?> of <3> New talent profiles for supervisors, specialists, and frontline workers will emerge in the agentic organization. Skills required for evolving roles in the AI era M-shaped general manager T-shaped deep specialist AI-empowered frontline worker Builds, supervises, and optimizes Provides human oversight of work- Focuses on interpersonal tasks hybrid workflows; has end-to-end flows; has extensive subject matter where human touch is required for product or process responsibility expertise optimal outcomes Higher cognitive¹ Higher cognitive Socioemotional AI AI AI Socioemotional Domain Domain Higher cognitive Domain Domain Multiskilled with ability to apply Deep knowledge in a specific High socioemotional skills with knowledge across domains domain basic AI fluency Gaps measured against roles today How does it compare to How does it compare to How does it compare to today’s manager role? today’s specialist role? today’s frontline role? Needs novel skill mix, particularly Augments current expertise- Enhances existing frontline in integrative end-to-end based roles with ability to roles—selected for their thinking and ability to manage teach and fine-tune agentic socioemotional skills—by AI-first workflows systems and handle exception adding AI capabilities cases and agentic learning 1For example, critical thinking, problem-solving, creativity, decision-making, abstract thinking. McKinsey & Company — AI-augmented frontline workers: employees in sales, service, HR, or operations who spend less time on systems and more time with humans Leaders themselves will also evolve. CEOs, product officers, and compliance heads will increasingly need the technology fluency once expected only of chief information officers. Filling these roles will require upskilling and reskilling at scale. Early evidence shows that employees without technical backgrounds can learn to manage agentic workflows as quickly as trained engineers. Career paths and performance systems will need to adapt as “boxes and lines” give way to ecosystems of human and digital skills. As these profiles take hold, the constructs of “organization” and “employee” will become more fluid, with ecosystems of human and digital talent blending inside and outside an organization. Culture acts as glue and ethical compass Culture will become both the operating glue and the ethical compass of the agentic organization. Pioneering agentic organizations highlight the need for orchestration—to align teams around shared context and outcomes, identify the right mix of human and AI capabilities (as not everything needs agentic AI), and build trust between humans and agents. The culture compass embeds values and long-term purpose into agentic systems, so companies don’t chase short- The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era 7 term efficiency at the expense of cohesion and trust. Early pioneers show that clarity, decisive leadership, and continuous learning are critical—but what will differentiate winners is their ability to preserve cohesion and identity while transforming at pace. 5. Technology and data In the agentic organization, technology and data will get democratized, supported by an agentic AI mesh. Agent-to-agent protocols will make integration across systems, machines, and humans easier and cheaper. Successful scalers will balance build-versus-buy decisions based on sources of distinctiveness and competitive advantage, avoiding technology or vendor lock-in so they can adapt quickly to a fast-evolving offering landscape. Distributed ownership of IT and data becomes feasible In the digital era, technology and data systems evolved from centralized monoliths and databases sitting far from the business toward microservices and data products sitting close to the business. This required significant software and data engineering expertise to design, develop, and maintain the underlying technology and data. In the emerging agentic age, business-side employees will be able to independently create software assets and manage data through agentic AI, which automates the software development life cycle (SDLC) with oversight from deep specialists. Early adopters have seen productivity at least double, with employees from diverse backgrounds—such as a French literature graduate in one of our teams—proving as capable as software engineers in building agentic workflows. To scale this transformation responsibly, organizations must adopt agentic platforms and architectures, such as an agentic AI mesh. These platforms provide reusable, high-performing “atomic” agents and data products equipped with technical safety guardrails to prevent buildup of technical debt or cybersecurity risks, while unlocking unprecedented levels of democratization and innovation. Agent-to-agent protocols ease interactions and integrations Agent-to-agent protocols are redefining interactions between humans, agents, IT systems, and devices. Rather than relying on traditional IT system integrations such as middleware and APIs that require heavy programming and custom system-to-system connections, agent-to-agent protocols enable systems to use agents to communicate with other systems. By moving to agent- to-agent dialogue that sits above the underlying system complexity, organizations can integrate legacy systems, cloud platforms, and even machines such as drones into cohesive workflows more quickly and at lower cost. More important, this allows for faster experimentation—in which new capabilities can be tested, scaled, or deprecated without months of engineering effort. Dynamic sourcing becomes critical Many business-critical platforms were historically built in-house or selected in rigorous sourcing processes, with multiyear implementation transformations. These systems were intended to remain largely stable to secure competitiveness for decades. A much more flexible strategy will be needed in the agentic age. Large language models and AI products are evolving so fast that locking in one solution or vendor can lead to technology that is outdated in a matter of weeks. At the same time, organizations will need to wall in proprietary organizational context, institutional knowledge, and nonpublic data for competitiveness. This requires architecture that separates the agentic structure, logic, and data from the underlying vendor landscape. The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era 8 How to start the journey The most frequent question we heard in our discussions with executives was, “How do I start?” Executives wonder how to create a North Star vision without clarity on what the future holds; how to assess maturity and upgrade needs for data, technical, and governance foundations; how to set priorities for value and feasibility; how to bring the organization along in terms of skills and mindset; and how to scale faster than rivals to create a competitive advantage. The clear and present danger is ending up with “more pilots than Lufthansa,” being disconnected from value drivers, seeing AI everywhere but in your profit-and-loss statements, or ending up with PR fiascos. Building on our transformation experiences, we believe that companies that want to secure a competitive advantage in developing an agentic organization should think boldly, move fast, and go deep. In the journey to become an agentic AI leader, executives will need a different mindset to get to a coherent set of choices and actions across the 15 themes we have laid out in this article (Exhibit 3). Web <2025> E<AxgheinbtiictA 3I3> Exhibit <3> of <3> Agentic organizations will unlock changes across 15 core themes. Key transformations, by organizational pillar Business Operating Governance Workforce, people, Technology model model and culture and data Channel disruption From org chart to Real-time decision- Hybrid talent system Distributed AI channels enable work chart making Functional boundaries ownership hyperpersonalization Agentic-first workflows Agents drive faster blur; “hire to retire” is AI mesh allows move humans “above budgeting, planning, redefined controlled democrati- the loop” and performance zation of IT systems and data Cost curve Reduced org friction Agentic governance New profiles; new Simplified integration compression Outcome-aligned Agents control skills Agent-to-agent AI-first workflows agentic teams become other agents with New archetypes (AI protocols ease drive marginal organizational embedded guardrails orchestrators, deep integrations among costs toward cost building blocks specialists, and an agents, systems, of compute AI-empowered front and devices line) emerge New sources of Flat and fluid Human oversight Culture matters even Dynamic sourcing differentiation networks remains more Flexibility in decisions Proprietary data Dynamic, highly The sweet spot be- Leaders set context for to buy or build avoids becomes a key empowered teams tween accountability scaling, build trust, and lock-in and protects differentiable factor steer to value and speed matters guide ethically intellectual property McKinsey & Company The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era 9 Companies that want to secure a competitive advantage in developing an agentic organization should think boldly, move fast, and go deep. We encourage leaders to think through three radical shifts to make a step change in how to transform for the agentic era: — From linear to exponential: While technology develops exponentially, organizations and operating models typically evolve linearly, which can limit how much value an organization can ultimately capture. Don’t let this happen. Leadership teams will need to take bold stances in adapting operating models toward the agentic organization—replacing functional silos with cross-functional autonomous agentic teams, redesigning incentives and support processes to enable the change, and investing in required capabilities. — From technology-forward to future-back: Delegating the agentic transformation to your technology leader, as you would with a software deployment, will not suffice. Leaders need to envision the organization of the future, its full value potential with AI-first processes and a hybrid human–agent organization—and then work backward to identify the places to begin. You can only learn by doing, not by reading books or talking about it on the golf course. Bringing this to life by boldly reimagining one end-to-end domain will go a long way in building the organization’s learning muscle. And in parallel, leaders should start planning for and building the scaling enablers beyond their first lighthouse. — From threat to opportunity: Leaders may feel apprehension about agentic AI’s impact on day-to-day operations. It is critical for executives to continuously engage with employees about the new possibilities that this technology can unlock, not just for the organization’s growth and purpose, but also for them as professionals. Overinvesting in upskilling beyond basic literacy—as well as change management, incentives, budget, communications, and performance management to support the transition—will help pave the way. Concretely, leadership teams can start by taking these steps: making agentic AI a prominent part of the top team agenda; outlining the CEO’s vision for creating an agentic organization; ramping up an AI center of excellence; upskilling people; and rewiring one or two lighthouse domains4 to launch agentic processes quickly and “learn live.” 4 Lighthouse domains are strategic areas or business functions that have the potential to produce substantial value with the assistance of AI, are visible to the rest of the organization, and have sufficient technological maturity. The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era 10 Find more content like this on the McKinsey Insights App Organizational paradigms do coexist: 89 percent of organizations still live in the industrial age, while 9 percent have agile or product and platform operating models from the digital age, and only 1 percent act as a decentralized network. But the time has come for organizations to move as quickly as possible toward the new agentic paradigm to gain a significant competitive advantage or risk being left behind. Many factors will influence the pace of adoption, including the development of AI models, availability of computing power, progress in robotics, changes in regulations, societal Scan • Download • Personalize understanding and acceptance, and the human appetite for risk and change. While our insights will evolve along with AI technology in the months and years to come, we are certain that the organizations that adapt and learn faster will be the early winners in this agentic era. Alexander Sukharevsky is a senior partner in McKinsey’s London office; Alexis Krivkovich is a senior partner in the Bay Area office; Arne Gast is a senior partner in the Amsterdam office, where Arsen Storozhev is a partner; Dana Maor is a senior partner in the Tel Aviv office; Deepak Mahadevan is a partner in the Brussels office; Lari Hämäläinen is a senior partner in the Seattle office; and Sandra Durth is a partner in the Cologne office. The authors wish to thank Ani Kelkar, Dave Kerr, Gerardo de Geest, Julie Goran, Klemens Hjartar, Mikhail Savin, Niels Geesing, Niels van Zijl, Olli Salo, Roman Galeev, Ulf Schrader, and Vito Di Leo for their contributions to this article. This article was edited by Eric Quiñones, a senior editor in the New Jersey office. Copyright © 2025 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved. The agentic organization: Contours of the next paradigm for the AI era 11