Firms must mitigate risks and overcome operational challenges to unlock agentic AI’s transformational potential. Reimagining the Produced in association with future of banking with agentic AI 2 MIT Technology Review Insights Key takeaways 1 Agentic AI is showing rapid adoption in banking; almost three-quarters of executives say their firms are already using it to some degree. Most say agentic A gentic AI is coming of age. And with it comes AI is not ready to be fully autonomous. new opportunities in the financial services 2 sector. Banks are increasingly employing Priority applications include fraud agentic AI to optimize processes, navigate detection and security, customer complex systems, and sift through vast experience, reducing costs, and increasing efficiency. quantities of unstructured data to make decisions and take actions—with or without human involvement. 3 Managing governance, risk, and “With the maturing of agentic AI, it is becoming a lot compliance, a lack of technical skills, more technologically possible for large-scale process and poor data quality and integration automation that was not possible with rules-based are the biggest challenges in adopting approaches like robotic process automation before,” agentic AI. says Sameer Gupta, Americas financial services AI leader at EY. “That moves the needle in terms of cost, efficiency, and customer experience impact.” From responding to customer services requests, to The emerging landscape automating loan approvals, adjusting bill payments to Agentic AI is already being rapidly adopted in the align with regular paychecks, or extracting key terms and banking sector. A 2025 survey of 250 banking exec- conditions from financial agreements, agentic AI has the utives by MIT Technology Review Insights found that potential to transform the customer experience—and 70% of leaders say their firm uses agentic AI to some how financial institutions operate too. Adapting to new degree, either through existing deployments (16%) or and emerging technologies like agentic AI is essential for pilot projects (52%) (see Figure 1). an organization’s survival, says Murli Buluswar, head of US personal banking analytics at Citi. “A company’s And it is already proving effective in a range of different ability to adopt new technical capabilities and rearchitect functions. More than half of executives say agentic AI how their firm operates is going to make the difference systems are highly capable of improving fraud detection between the firms that succeed and those that get left (56%) and security (51%). Other strong use cases behind,” says Buluswar. “Your people and your firm must include reducing cost and increasing efficiency (41%) recognize that how they go about their work is going to and improving the customer experience (41%) (see be meaningfully different.” Figure 2). “Think of agentic AI as like an intern helping you get all Methodology of the more simplistic tasks done, but the human is still MIT Technology Review Insights surveyed 250 there to oversee and take executives and leaders in banking and financial services from around the world to explore how agentic AI is being the final decision.” used. All organizations have revenues over $500 million. The survey was conducted in April and May of 2025. Ian Glasner, Group Head of Emerging Technology, Innovation, and Ventures, HSBC MIT Technology Review Insights 3 Specific use cases showing promise include mortgage underwriting, small business loans, collections, disputed Figure 1: Almost three-quarters of transactions, and “know your customer” and anti-money banking executives are using agentic laundering requirements, says Gupta. In risk and AI to some degree compliance, banks are using agentic AI systems to Survey question: What stage is your organization at continuously monitor employees, customers, and deploying agentic AI? potential bad actors using deepfakes or other AI-powered methods to impersonate customers and attempt fraud. Deploying 16% Using agentic AI in this way reduces the workload of use cases humans who have to manually review cases, and frees them up for more high-risk and high-complexity work. Piloting 52% use cases In the future, more than half of the banking executives surveyed say they expect to continue to improve fraud Identifying 22% detection (75%), security (64%), and the customer use cases experience (51%) (see Figure 3). 8% Transformative potential Exploring The most promising use cases for agentic AI at scale in banking have a few characteristics, says Buluswar 2% at Citi: Not using yet • High-volume processes, such as handling hundreds of Source: MIT Technology Review Insights survey, 2025 thousands of calls or customer interactions per day. • Back-end processes, such as investigating a suspicious For example, agentic AI can reduce the internal friction transaction or dispute with a merchant. associated with mortgage underwriting. The process can be onerous for customers who must provide all the • Front-end processes, such as giving a customer credit. necessary information and for bank employees who must parse through and stitch together all that data. • Aggregating large amounts of information from diverse It can take weeks to reach a decision. But automating sources, such as for a case investigation or underwriting. the process using agentic AI with humans in the loop can dramatically increase the speed of decision-making and result in a positive client and customer experience. “A company’s ability to Seizing on the opportunity relies on organizations adopt new technical training their broader workforce to be savvier about how they use AI-based systems, says Gupta of EY. If capabilities and rearchitect achieved, the benefits of a smarter approach to agentic how their firm operates AI include: is going to make the Fewer errors, faster detection of errors, and faster learning. “One of the most powerful things about AI is difference between the that these systems can get more accurate over time if firms that succeed and they are retrained on the right data with proper lifecycle management and oversight,” says Ian Glasner, group those that get left behind.” head of emerging technology, innovation, and ventures at HSBC. “The system will make mistakes, but with the Murli Buluswar, Head of US Personal right feedback loop, systems can be updated to avoid Banking Analytics, Citi repeating the same mistakes.” 4 MIT Technology Review Insights Early identification of security issues before they transfers. AI agents extract the information and present grow into broader problems. Agentic AI is already an action to a human for approval. “I think fundamentally reshaping threat detection, automatically responding to AI will apply to every part of the business: front office, anomalies by quarantining infected machines. Agents middle office, back office,” says Nimish Panchmatia, can also autonomously manage identity verification and chief data and transformation officer at DBS Bank. access to data and systems. Glasner sees a potential “Fundamentally, the way work gets done is going to be future opportunity for banks to provide micro- very different in the coming years.” personalization with fraud detection and prevention. Banks will be able to further customize detection to At present, the technology is most effective when customer’s patterns and preferences with appropriate used to complement the work of human workers. transparency and user control. Most respondents in our survey say their AI systems are capable of advising (95%), assisting (92%), cooperating Improved customer service and strategic decision- with (82%), and augmenting users’ abilities (76%). making. “Wouldn’t it be powerful for a wealth or Around a third (38%) say AI is not capable of being financial advisor to be able to stitch together anything fully autonomous in the digital world (see Figure 4). and everything you know about a client, tie that to macroeconomic conditions and portfolio observations, In the next 18 months, executives are prioritizing most and then have a much more surgical set of interactions levels of use cases at a high or medium level of priority, with your clients?” says Buluswar. except for those in the real world, such as retail banking locations (see Figure 5). Physical AI—the integration A better workforce and employee experience. DBS of artificial intelligence with physical systems and Bank, headquartered in Singapore, is using generative environments—is still far off. Two thirds (64%) say AI AI and agentic AI to synthesize and classify highly is not capable of making decisions and taking actions complicated SWIFT messages that contain financial independently in the real world (see Figure 4). instructions for transactions such as international Figure 2: Banks are finding success using agentic AI to improve fraud detection, security, and customer experience Of those deploying agentic AI, we asked how capable their organizations have been at various outcomes. Highly capable Capable Somewhat capable Not capable Improving fraud detection 56% 32% 7% 5% Improving IT/security 51% 39% 5% 2% risk management Improving customer experience 41% 46% 10% 2% Reducing cost and 41% 39% 15% 5% increased efficiency Creating new revenue streams/increasing growth 39% 44% 15% 2% Improving employee experience 37% 41% 17% 5% Creating trust 34% 41% 15% 7% Increasing efficiency 22% 56% 15% 7% Source: MIT Technology Review Insights survey, 2025 MIT Technology Review Insights 5 “You can start with a simpler agentic system that addresses a set of the needs within a process and scale that over time to automate bigger and bigger parts of the process itself.” Sameer Gupta, Americas Financial Services AI Leader, EY Overcoming the challenges Organizational adoption. The second most To reap the rewards of this transformative potential, common challenge for executives in our survey is a organizations must overcome several critical and lack of technology skills and capabilities (cited by 58% complex obstacles: of respondents) (see Figure 6). Firms face the dual challenge of training the workforce to effectively use Governance, risk, and compliance. The number AI systems, which can help overcome organizational one challenge respondents identified in creating resistance to adoption, while also measuring ROI value from agentic AI is in managing governance, risk, sufficiently to overcome C-suite skepticism. “How do and compliance with confidence (cited by 63% of you improve the general IQ and EQ of the organization respondents) (see Figure 6). As the technology rapidly to be able to actually adopt an AI system and not have evolves, regulations around the world are lagging behind. organ rejection but rather have stickiness and usage?” Without firm regulatory standards in place, organizations asks Gupta. need to implement their own guardrails. Figure 3: Respondents expect future gains in fraud detection, security, and customer service, with significantly lower expectations for trust Survey question: What are the most important outcomes your bank/financial institution expects from agentic AI? Rank 1 Rank 2 Rank 3 No rank Improve fraud 26% 19% 29% 25% detection Improve IT/security 20% 27% 17% 36% risk management Reduce cost and 15% 13% 10% 62% increased efficiency Improve customer 14% 16% 21% 49% experience Improve employee experience 11% 9% 10% 70% New revenue streams/ increasing growth 7% 11% 10% 72% Create trust 6% 5%3% 86% Source: MIT Technology Review Insights survey, 2025 6 MIT Technology Review Insights Data integration and security. Poor data quality and Figure 4: Most say agentic AI is helpful in many integration is the third biggest challenge for banking ways, but not yet ready to be fully autonomous executives in our survey (according to 54% of Survey question: Rate your organization’s current level respondents) (see Figure 6). Large financial institutions of AI use case capabilities for employees, customers, have hundreds of existing data systems that require partners, etc. reliable linkages, or application programming interfaces Highly capable Not capable (APIs), to execute agentic responses. Role-based Somewhat capable Don’t know/Not applicable access controls and security protocols are imperative, Advisory says Gupta, and can prevent a system from learning 40% 55%4%1% something it should not learn based on its role. Assistive Technological complexity. Given the rapid pace of 56% 36% 7% 2% technology change, new AI model and platform releases Cooperative come out every three to six months, or even more quickly. 38% 44% 17% 2% Executives face uncertainty about future-proofing technology investments. Augmentative 33% 43% 22% 2% Questions around autonomy. “What sort of autonomy Digitally autonomous should you give to an agent-based system?” asks Gupta of EY. “When can it work entirely autonomously, and 27% 34% 38% 2% when does it require human intervention, or at least a Physically autonomous human approval or review to the process?” 2% 31% 64% 2% Building trust. Another major challenge when it comes Source: MIT Technology Review Insights survey, 2025 to implementing AI in the high-stakes world of financial services is trust. In a recent EY survey, just 42% of Figure 5: Most use cases for agentic AI are respondents said they would trust financial services being prioritized, except autonomy in the companies to manage AI in ways that align with their physical world best interests, while 30% say they would actively Survey question: Looking ahead to the next 18 months, distrust them to do so. The difference between those what is your organization’s priority for adopting various two extremes is a net trust percentage of only 12%, one levels of AI use cases? of the lowest levels of the industries studied. Agentic AI High priority Medium priority Low priority seems unlikely to change this dynamic at present; just Assistive 14% of respondents in our survey say their firm expects trust to be an outcome of agentic AI (see Figure 3). 62% 30% 5% Advisory Investing in cybersecurity is a key way to build trust. 55% 38% 7% A previous MIT Technology Review Insight’s survey found that 40% of executives in regulated industries Cooperative believe that effective security practices can strengthen 50% 36% 13% trust in agentic AI. And cybersecurity can contribute Digitally autonomous to the bottom line too. A 2025 study by EY found that cybersecurity can add between 11% and 20%, or a 36% 45% 19% median of $36 million, in value to each enterprise-wide Augmentative initiative it is involved in. 34% 42% 24% Seizing the agentic AI opportunity Physically autonomous Adopting emerging technologies like agentic AI is not 4% 26% 68% simple. The good news is that it can be implemented incrementally, says Gupta. “You can start with a simpler Source: MIT Technology Review Insights survey, 2025 MIT Technology Review Insights 7 agentic system that addresses a set of the needs within a process and scale that over time to automate bigger Lessons learned in and bigger parts of the process itself.” creating agentic Targeted aspects of customer service such as fraud experiences in banking claims, collections, and disputes lend themselves to automation as agentic AI matures and institutions The key to unlocking growth opportunities with agentic become more proficient and efficient at adapting agents AI is to be systematic and rigorous in your approach, says to existing governance guidelines and frameworks. Murli Buluswar, head of US personal banking analytics at Citi. “Rather than start with the task, you should ask, ‘What am I looking to accomplish and can I reimagine how that At HSBC, Glasner says priority areas for near-term should look?’” he says. impact for AI include credit lending and underwriting, onboarding and “know your customer” operations, Buluswar recommends that executives develop a contact centers and query management, engineering, framework to guide their thinking, asking five questions to and fraud detection and prevention. As they prioritize break down a set of activities for further business use cases, companies should take the following steps to case analysis: ensure meaningful agentic AI improvements, according to Glasner: 1 Is a process manual? Establish a robust governance framework: “This is all 2 Is a process expensive? about safety and making sure that our AI systems are being built in a way that we as a firm are comfortable 3 with and within our risk tolerance,” he says. Glasner Is a process time-lagged? says HBSC maintains a detailed inventory of AI systems, linked to business owners, model documentation, and 4 Is a process error-prone? risk classification. 5 Is a process consequential if you make mistakes? Buluswar then adopts three lenses through which to think through an agentic AI strategy: commercial, human, and technological. “The big thing is not about telling customers why they should be excited or care about AI but rather being able to demonstrate that value in ways that matter to them,” he says. “The magic is actually being able to demonstrate value in a tangible material way at scale and in a way that customers can understand.” “Agentic AI is a continuous journey. If done properly, there’s significant value at the end of it. But you have to persevere.” Nimish Panchmatia, Chief Data and Transformation Officer, DBS Bank 8 MIT Technology Review Insights Prioritize use cases with clear business value: Figure 6: A majority cite challenges managing HSBC has developed a mix of use cases tied to priority governance, risk, and compliance with areas of the business, as well a process that evaluates agentic AI Survey question: What challenges does your the value—including revenue, cost, or efficiency organization face when creating value from improvements—the company generates from building agentic AI? an AI system. Top-3 key challenge Not a top-3 key challenge Confidence to manage governance, risk, and compliance Create common platforms and capabilities: With more than 200,000 employees in over 50 markets, it would 63% 37% quickly get chaotic for each technology team to do its Lack of technology skills and capabilities own thing. A common technology platform allows data 58% 42% scientists, machine learning experts, and software engineers to build systems that are easier to govern, Poor data quality and integration scale, and monitor safely. 54% 46% Focus on data quality and accessibility: HSBC Insufficient prioritization of use cases focuses on creating a single source of truth, data 29% 71% lineage processes, and formatting and contextual Lack of sufficient change management processes data standards needed for a variety of use cases. 27% 73% Augment humans with AI: “You can almost think of Internal and external silos agentic AI as like an intern helping you get all of the 22% 78% more simplistic tasks done, but the human is still there to oversee and take the final decision,” says Glasner. Lack of funding for technology “Slowly things will move in the direction of being more 21% 79% and more autonomous, but I don’t think it’s going to be an overnight flip.” Lack of funding for AI licensing 14% 86% Transform the workforce: “To succeed, we need Ability to show value/ROI to invest heavily in reskilling, recognizing that even experienced staff will need to learn how to build, 12% 88% supervise, and use AI tools responsibly,” says Glasner. Source: MIT Technology Review Insights survey, 2025 Metrics are key The PURE framework requires projects be: For its part, DBS Bank has built a sandbox Purposeful Respectful for pure experimentation, but anything that Ensure AI solutions have a Design AI interactions that interacts with people must adhere every year to well-defined purpose that clearly do not violate customer explains why you’re adopting privacy or social norms. its PURE framework for ethical AI governance. them. For very sensitive use cases, the company insists on real-time metrics, with allowable Unsurprising Easy to explain upper and lower performance limits. If any of Prevent unexpected uses Clearly explain AI decision- those metrics are breached, there’s a kill switch, of data from the customer’s making and data-use processes according to Nimish Panchmatia, chief data and point of view. to both customers and regulators. transformation officer at DBS Bank. Panchmatia says agentic AI has generated a lot of excitement, along with challenges implementing innovations quickly. Executives need to be in it for the long haul. “It’s a continuous journey, and done properly, there’s significant value at the end of it,” he says. “But you have to persevere.” MIT Technology Review Insights 9 “Reimagining the future of banking with agentic AI” is an executive briefing paper by MIT Technology Review Insights. MIT Technology Review Insights has collected and reported on all findings contained in this paper independently, regardless of participation or sponsorship. Laurel Ruma was the editor of this report and Nicola Crepaldi was the publisher. We would like to thank the sponsor, EY, as well as the following experts for their time and insights: Murli Buluswar, Head of US Personal Banking Analytics, Citi Ian Glasner, Group Head of Emerging Technology, Innovation, and Ventures, HSBC Sameer Gupta, Americas Financial Services AI Leader, EY Nimish Panchmatia, Chief Data and Transformation Officer, DBS Bank About MIT Technology Review Insights MIT Technology Review Insights is the custom publishing division of MIT Technology Review, the world’s longest-running technology magazine, backed by the world’s foremost technology institution — producing live events and research on the leading technology and business challenges of the day. Insights conducts qualitative and quantitative research and analysis in the US and abroad and publishes a wide variety of content, including articles, reports, infographics, videos, and podcasts. This content was researched, designed, and written entirely by human writers, editors, analysts, and illustrators. This includes the writing of surveys and data analysis. AI tools that may have been used were limited to secondary production processes that passed thorough human review. From the sponsor EY | Building a better working world EY is building a better working world by creating new value for clients, people, society and the planet, while building trust in capital markets. Enabled by data, AI and advanced technology, EY teams help clients shape the future with confidence and develop answers for the most pressing issues of today and tomorrow. EY teams work across a full spectrum of services in assurance, consulting, tax, strategy and transactions. Fueled by sector insights, a globally connected, multidisciplinary network and diverse ecosystem partners, EY teams can provide services in more than 150 countries and territories. All in to shape the future with confidence. EY refers to the global organization, and may refer to one or more, of the member firms of Ernst & Young Global Limited, each of which is a separate legal entity. Ernst & Young Global Limited, a UK company limited by guarantee, does not provide services to clients. Information about how EY collects and uses personal data and a description of the rights individuals have under data protection legislation are available via ey.com/privacy. EY member firms do not practice law where prohibited by local laws. For more information about our organization, please visit ey.com. © 2025 EYGM Limited. All Rights Reserved. EYG no. 006969-25Gbl ED None The views of third parties set out in this publication are not necessarily the views of the global EY organization or its member firms. Moreover, they should be seen in the context of the time they were made. Illustrations Cover art and spot illustrations created from Adobe Stock. While every effort has been taken to verify the accuracy of this information, MIT Technology Review Insights cannot accept any responsibility or liability for reliance on any person in this report or any of the information, opinions, or conclusions set out in this report. © Copyright MIT Technology Review Insights, 2025. All rights reserved. MIT Technology Review Insights www.technologyreview.com insights@technologyreview.com