In collaboration with November 2025 The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI by Sam Ransbotham, David Kiron, Shervin Khodabandeh, Sesh Iyer, and Amartya Das AUTHORS Sam Ransbotham is a professor of analytics at Sesh Iyer is a managing director and senior the Carroll School of Management at Boston partner at BCG and the North America chair College, as well as guest editor for MIT Sloan for BCG X, where he helps clients drive Management Review’s Artificial Intelligence large-scale AI transformations. He is the and Business Strategy Big Ideas initiative. global leader for the AI & Tech Lab at the BCG Henderson Institute and can be reached at David Kiron is the editorial director, research, sesh@bcg.com. of MIT Sloan Management Review and program lead for its Big Ideas research initiatives. Amartya Das is a principal at BCG and currently serves as an ambassador at the Shervin Khodabandeh is a managing director BCG Henderson Institute, where he leads and senior partner at Boston Consulting Group research on the impact of technology and (BCG) and the coleader of its AI business AI on society, focusing on how emerging in North America. He is a leader in BCG X technologies reshape both companies and and has over 20 years of experience driving public institutions. He can be reached at business impact from AI and digital. He can be das.amartya@bcg.com. contacted at shervin@bcg.com. CONTRIBUTORS Todd Fitz, Kevin Foley, Sarah Johnson, Matt Langione, Michele Lee DeFilippo, Amanda Luther, Jennifer Martin, Samantha Oldroyd, Meenal Pore, Allison Ryder, Taylor Zhang, Leila Zhu, Leonid Zhukov, David Zuluaga Martínez The research and analysis for this report was conducted under the direction of the authors as part of an MIT Sloan Management Review research initiative in collaboration with and sponsored by Boston Consulting Group. To cite this report, please use: S. Ransbotham, D. Kiron, S. Khodabandeh, S. Iyer, and A. Das, “The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI,” MIT Sloan Management Review and Boston Consulting Group, November 2025. SUPPORTING SPONSORS https://doi.org/10.63383/jAXE2583 Copyright © Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2025. All rights reserved. REPRINT #: 67270 CONTENTS 1 Introduction 4 Strategic Tensions When Adopting Agentic AI 11 A Strategic Overhaul of Workflows, Governance, Roles, and Investment 17 Conclusion 18 Appendix Introduction Executives have long relied on simple categories to frame how technology fits into organizations: Tools automate tasks, people make decisions, and strategy determines how the two work together. That framing is no longer sufficient. A new class of sys- tems — agentic AI — complicates these boundaries. These systems can plan, act, and learn on their own. They are not just tools to be operated or assistants waiting for instructions. Increasingly, they behave like autonomous teammates, capable of exe- cuting multistep processes and adapting as they go. Notably, 76% of respondents to our global executive survey say they view agentic AI as more like a coworker than a tool. For strategists, agentic AI’s dual nature as both a tool and coworker creates new dilemmas. A single agent might take over a routine step, support a human expert with analysis, and collaborate across workflows in ways that shift decision-making authority. This tool-coworker duality breaks down traditional management logic, which assumes that technology either substitutes or complements, auto- mates or augments, is labor or capital, or is a tool or a worker, but not all at once. Organizations now face an unprecedented challenge: managing a single system that demands both human resource approaches and asset management techniques. The separation of technology and strategy inside most organizations exacerbates this challenge. Technology executives focus on technology issues, making pilot, vendor, or infrastructure decisions. Strategic executives focus on markets, competition, and people. But agentic AI makes that separation untenable. It simultaneously influences the design of processes, the structure of roles, the allocation of decision rights, and the culture of accountability. ABOUT THE RESEARCH This report presents findings from the ninth annual global research study on artificial intelligence and business strategy by MIT Sloan Management Review and Boston Consulting Group. In spring 2025, we fielded a global survey and subsequently analyzed records from 2,102 respondents representing more than 21 industries and 116 countries. We also interviewed 11 executives leading AI initiatives in a broad range of companies and industries, including financial services, technology, retail, energy, and health care. Our research examines the speed of agentic AI adoption inside organizations, which has outpaced the adoption of traditional and generative AI. Exploring how agentic AI relates to capital and labor, this report outlines a series of resultant tensions and offers suggestions for organizations seeking to resolve them. The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 1 2 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG A Tidal Wave of Adoption, a Trickle of Strategy Despite the technology’s wide-ranging implications, organizations are rapidly adopting agentic AI, well before they have a strategy in place. Their adoption of traditional AI has climbed to 72% over the past eight years, accord- ing to our survey. (see figure 1.) Generative AI achieved 70% adoption in just three years. In just two years, agentic AI has already reached 35% adoption, with another 44% of organizations planning to deploy it soon. Vendors are accelerating this trend by embedding agentic capabilities as features in their offerings, causing organizations to imple- ment agentic AI before they have developed a strategic management framework. The result is a growing strategic risk: Agentic AI is spread- ing across enterprises faster than leaders can redesign processes, assign decision rights, or rethink workforce % 100 80 70% 57% 56% 60 53% 52% 50% 46% 44% 40 20 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 IA gnisu snoitazinagro fo egatnecreP models. Our research, based on 2,000-plus respondents to a global survey and interviews with leading executives, finds that organizations have multiple options for obtain- ing value from agentic AI. It offers possibilities not only to improve cost efficiency but also to expand revenue, accelerate innovation, compress learning curves, and restructure organizations. Without a strategic approach that aligns these objectives, organizations risk limiting returns on their investments. The Executive Dilemma Agentic AI’s dual nature as both a tool and coworker creates competing organizational pressures that man- agement frameworks cannot resolve. IT leaders want predictable, scalable systems with clear technical specifi- cations. CFOs need investment models with measurable returns and depreciation schedules. HR executives require 72% 0 2025 Source: MIT Sloan Management Review-BCG global executive surveys, 2017-2025. FIGURE 1 Traditional AI Adoption Continues to Grow Since 2023, the percentage of organizations piloting or deploying AI solutions has risen 22 percentage points. The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 3 performance management frameworks and supervision Organizations and individuals can use agentic AI to dif- protocols. Business leaders demand both efficiency and ferentiate themselves because they can now take advan- adaptability from the same system. tage of the ways that agentic AI does not fit traditional management frameworks. The same system that offers These competing demands aren’t implementation chal- cost reductions through tool-like automation also enables lenges. They’re strategic imperatives that expose new revenue expansion through workerlike adaptability, sources of organizational differentiation. Among organiza- innovation acceleration through continuous learning, tions with extensive agentic AI use, we find that 73% believe and organizational learning through human-agent inter- using AI fundamentally increases their ability to stand out, actions. But accessing these multiple sources of value while 76% of their employees believe it changes how indi- requires navigating operational tensions that no existing viduals differentiate themselves from coworkers. framework addresses. The path forward requires understanding four opera- tional tensions that expose the inadequacy of traditional management approaches and then redesigning funda- mental processes — work design, governance, work- WHY AGENTIC AI SPREADS SO FAST force planning, learning, and investment — to work with rather than against agentic AI’s inherent duality. This The rapid adoption of agentic AI aligns perfectly with the diffu- report offers evidence-based recommendations on how sion of innovations theory, which explains why some technol- to proceed. ogies spread faster than others.i According to the framework, innovations diffuse more quickly when they offer a clear relative advantage, are compatible with existing systems, are simple to Strategic Tensions When try, and have observable results. Adopting Agentic AI Agentic AI excels on all four dimensions. It builds on the famil- iarity of generative AI that organizations have already adopted, The competing pressures executives face aren’t abstract integrates seamlessly into widely used platforms, requires min- theoretical problems. They manifest as specific, irrecon- imal new infrastructure for experimentation with it, and deliv- cilable conflicts in day-to-day operations. Our research ers immediate, visible productivity benefits. As Chevron’s chief data and analytics officer, Margery Connor, explains, “With the identified four distinct tensions that emerge when orga- company standardized on a single vendor’s platform, more than nizations try to integrate agentic AI into existing work- half of the workforce has access to AI tools, and, by extension, flows. Each tension represents a fundamental clash access to agentic AI.” The infrastructure is already there. between established management principles, forcing leaders to choose to either apply incompatible approaches This built-in availability dramatically reduces barriers to adop- or develop entirely new, hybrid frameworks. Successfully tion. Employees can begin using agentic features without implementing entirely new systems, which encourages organic navigating this challenge requires that leaders manage the experimentation across the organization. As more people expe- following tensions: rience tangible benefits, adoption accelerates through word of 1. Scalability versus adaptability. Tools scale mouth and via demonstration effects — exactly what diffusion predictably; workers adapt dynamically. Agentic theory predicts. AI’s ability to do both simultaneously requires new The implication for leaders: Agentic AI’s rapid spread isn’t an organizational design principles. accident. It’s happening because the technology is designed to minimize adoption friction. This means that competitive bene- 2. Experience versus expediency. When is the right fits will come not from early access to the technology but from time to invest in agentic systems and how should those superior organizational design around it. investments be made? Leaders are faced with balancing long-term capability building with short-term returns. 4 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG 3. Supervision versus autonomy. How do you Agentic AI sits in between: more adaptable than tools but supervise something designed to work autonomously? (currently) less flexible than workers. How should orga- Traditional oversight models assume either full human nizations design processes with intermediate flexibility? control or complete automation, not systems that require Agentic AI’s ability to scale predictably and adapt dynam- some human control and differing degrees of automation. ically requires new organizational design principles that don’t fit neatly into existing management systems. 4. Retrofit versus reengineer. When, and by how much, should organizations change processes? That In the heart of Goodwill Industries’ bustling sorting facil- decision requires resources and attention that most ity, a river of donations flows ceaselessly with a chaotic change-management frameworks don’t address. mix of vintage T-shirts, designer jeans, and forgotten The organizations that will succeed are those that rec- fabrics. A team of dedicated workers painstakingly sifts ognize agentic AI’s dual nature as a feature, not a bug. through this mountain of textiles, but AI agents are Strategies that embrace the ambiguity and develop hybrid increasingly able to help. This system is not a simple com- approaches rather than forcing these systems into existing puter vision machine, rigidly programmed to recognize management categories benefit from both their tool-like only a few specific items. Instead, it is a flexible AI that scalability and workerlike adaptability. constantly learns from and adapts to the ever-changing stream of goods: It can learn to distinguish between a 1. The Flexibility Tension: Scalability cashmere sweater and a wool blend, identify a rare col- Versus Adaptability lectible from a common toy, and even spot subtle signs Human workers are maximally flexible. They can switch of wear and tear that might make an item unsuitable for tasks, learn new skills, and adapt to unexpected situa- resale. Steve Preston, president and CEO of Goodwill, tions with minimal retraining. Tools are much less flexible. says, “Our supply chain from beginning to end is very Machinery and infrastructure excel at specific purposes and complicated and requires a lot of human intervention, a lot scale predictably, but they can struggle to adapt to change. of decision points, and a lot of judgment. So throughout Our research identified four distinct tensions that emerge when organizations try to integrate agentic AI into existing workflows. The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 5 that process, we see a lot of opportunities to incorporate ensuring that each item finds its way to the right place, AI in the entire flow of goods, the decision-making pro- whether it’s a boutique, an online store, or a recycling facil- cess, and making sure that everything we receive finds its ity. The AI’s ability to handle complex judgment tasks is best home somewhere in the cycle.” encouraging leaders to replace a decades-old, human-centric Goodwill is piloting AI technology that could ultimately workflow with new processes. They have begun to design be used to sort billions of pounds of donations each year, processes for and with agentic AI. AI’s Role 13% 42% Coach 12% 36% Mentor 11% 35% Colleague 8% 26% Rival 5% 18% Boss 26% 61% Assistant % 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 Now In 3 years FIGURE 2 AI’s Role in the Organization Our data shows survey respondents believe AI will become more like an assistant, coach, mentor, or colleague rather than a rival or boss. 6 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG As the composition of workers shifts, deploying scalable, flexible AI workers creates a strategic tension for process design across the enterprise. AI systems already act as assistants, colleagues, mentors, capabilities. Should investments in agentic AI be viewed coaches, and even as rivals and bosses. Most of our survey more like investments in tools or in workers, or both? respondents anticipate that AI will become more involved in Directly addressing that question reveals two critical each of these roles within three years. (see figure 2, page 6.) investment tensions that challenge conventional finan- As the composition of workers shifts, deploying scalable, cial planning: flexible AI workers creates a strategic tension for process design across the enterprise. Agentic systems might work Timing: The moving-target problem. AI systems are best in standardized environments, but over-standardization evolving quickly, creating uncertainty about when an orga- can eliminate their ability to learn and develop humanlike nization should make significant investments in them. adaptability — a capability that can help organizations han- Adopt too early and risk technological obsolescence; wait dle edge cases and system failures. Organizations need both too long and risk strategic benefits. As Jeff Reihl, execu- the efficiency of standardized processes and the flexibility tive vice president and technology chairman at LexisNexis of humanlike improvisation. Legal & Professional, observes, “This technology is changing so fast, we might have to do a quick catch-up.” The threat: Organizations that optimize for AI efficiency Chevron’s chief data and analytics officer, Margery Connor, miss out on AI’s humanlike adaptive responses to system echoes this sentiment, describing the need to remain adap- failures or unexpected market shifts. tive to emerging tools and updates: “The fast-paced devel- The opportunity: Companies that strike the right balance opment of agentic AI requires organizations to be agile can achieve both AI-driven efficiency and human-powered while consistently upholding their data and AI governance adaptability, creating strategic benefits. standards,” she says. 2. The Investment Tension: Experience Unlike traditional tools with predictable upgrade cycles, Versus Expediency agentic AI requires continuous adaptation and learning. Standard net present value calculations fail when the most Traditional tools require large upfront costs but deliver valuable applications haven’t been conceived yet, and predictable returns through established depreciation conventional timing models can’t account for the speed schedules. Human workers are an ongoing variable of technological evolution. Plus, applying conventional expense, but their value appreciates with experience and replacement schedules risks rapid value decay as systems training. Agentic AI defies both models, requiring sub- fall behind the technological curve. stantial initial development costs and ongoing variable costs, such as training models on new data. While many Size: Platforms versus point solutions. Large orga- technology systems require ongoing maintenance, agen- nizations face a fundamental choice: invest heavily in tic AI systems simultaneously depreciate through model comprehensive AI platforms or pursue smaller, targeted drift while appreciating through fine-tuning and emergent point solutions. The scale of required investment for each The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 7 approach can vary dramatically, making it difficult to accu- Agentic AI’s hybrid features make it difficult to accu- rately gauge upfront and continuing costs. rately measure investment returns over meaningful time frames or even to assess upfront investment requirements. Platform investments demand substantial upfront com- Companies measuring agentic AI returns through conven- mitments with uncertain returns. At Capital One, Prem tional depreciation schedules systematically undervalue Natarajan, executive vice president, chief scientist, and the continuous-learning and emergent capabilities these head of enterprise AI, describes building “dozens of use systems generate, failing to account for significant portions cases at scale” from a single, substantial platform invest- of actual value creation. ment. The full impact of Capital One’s strategy can be assessed through the lenses of technology exploitation The threat: Organizations that apply traditional invest- and exploration. Similarly, Walter Sun, senior vice presi- ment frameworks to agentic AI systematically underinvest dent and global head of AI at SAP, explains that creating in continuous learning and adaptation, leading to rapid “a generative AI hub” allows for full life-cycle management value decay while the compound returns available from of large language models, whereas building LLMs individ- integrated AI ecosystems are missed. ually into isolated applications requires the costly integra- The opportunity: Companies that embrace hybrid tion of legacy systems before any returns materialize. SAP investment models and diversified AI portfolios can cre- focused on the value to the developer ecosystem and used ate compounding returns as their systems learn, adapt, and that to determine what would be a sufficient return from generate unforeseen capabilities across multiple autonomy having a platform, Sun notes. levels and business contexts. The window for establishing Investing in point solutions offers more predictable costs this strategic advantage is narrowing as competitive pres- and measurable returns but risks missing the compound sures intensify and technological evolution accelerates. value that emerges when AI capabilities are integrated The question isn’t whether to resolve these tensions but, across business functions. Organizations that choose this rather, how quickly organizations adapt their investment path may find themselves managing dozens of discon- frameworks to match the reality of agentic AI. nected AI tools without the infrastructure to scale or adapt. 3. The Control Tension: Supervision Organizations investing solely in one approach, whether Versus Autonomy human-in-the-loop systems or fully autonomous agents, miss the compound value created by agentic AI’s con- Tools are fully owned and controlled, behaving predict- tributions in multiple decision-making scenarios. Each ably once deployed. Workers must be managed through autonomy level serves different risk tolerances and busi- contracts, incentives, and oversight because humans have ness contexts, but measuring ROI in isolation obscures the autonomy and may pursue divergent goals. Agentic AI strategic value of a diversified AI portfolio. requires supervision and management like a worker does Unlike traditional tools with predictable upgrade cycles, agentic AI requires continuous adaptation and learning. 8 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG +55% 37% AI systems work with ambiguous inputs 57% +179% 14% AI systems work independently from humans 39% +250% AI systems have 10% decision-making authority 35% 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Now In 3 years Percentage of respondents who strongly agree or agree with each statement. FIGURE 3 Organizations Anticipate Continued Increases in AI Autonomy Survey respondents are two to three times more likely to expect AI systems to work independently from humans and have decision- making authority in three years compared to today. because its outputs can be unpredictable, even though customer-facing, affecting the decisions that we would organizations own it like an autonomous tool. How can make without a human in the loop.”1 organizations design processes to effectively supervise an Despite owning the technology, organizations must treat agent that also works autonomously? (see figure 3.) agentic AI systems with the same oversight typically A process that includes supervision inherently keeps reserved for human employees. humans involved in decision-making processes. Chevron’s But at the same time, organizations want the benefits of Connor notes, “We always have a human in the loop scale that AI agents can offer while avoiding the bottle- to review and analyze the output so we can determine necks that human oversight could create. One leader we whether it makes sense or not.” Chandra Kapireddy, for- spoke with asked, “How do you make sure that you have mer head of generative AI, machine learning, and analytics the right set of controls in place? We’re calling it human- at Truist Bank, says, “If you look at the financial services in-the-loop, or ‘human-out-of-the-loop’ for some of our industry, I don’t think there is any use case that is actually low-risk use cases.” The decision to move to human-out- The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 9 of-the-loop for lower-risk use cases involves context- dependent assessments of risk. Unlike a simple tool with a fixed function, agentic AI operates within a complex environment where its actions can have unintended conse- quences. That means organizations must craft policies that set boundaries for decision-making and action to serve as safeguards so that organizational behaviors align with strategic objectives, and negative outcomes are prevented. This is analogous to setting policies and providing over- sight for human employees. Sun at SAP describes building a generative AI hub for this purpose: “Through that, we can then connect to different large language models. But we also have the ability, then, to put in the guardrails for all the business applications. We can put in our own analytics. We can put in our own security, our privacy, our compli- ance, and so on.” The need for these controls highlights the fact that AI is not a fully predictable tool but an agent that managers must guide and constrain. When a tool malfunctions, it’s a defect. When a coworker makes a mistake, it’s a management and learning oppor- tunity. Managers can apply this coworker mindset to AI. Rebecca Finlay, CEO at the Partnership on AI, argues that companies need to be more transparent about their AI failures: “I would love for us to be in a position where we could share more about things that go wrong, because in that sharing, we learn.” This approach treats AI not as an infallible tool but as an agent whose errors must be under- stood, managed, and learned from. The learning process parallels how effective teams handle human error. The threat: Organizations that fail to develop appropriate governance frameworks for agentic AI may face compli- ance failures, misaligned outputs, or runaway systems that damage business operations. The opportunity: Companies that master the art of man- aging artificial colleagues can scale specialized capabilities without the traditional constraints of human hiring, train- ing, and retention. 4. The Scope Tension: Retrofit Versus Reengineer Agentic AI presents leaders with a critical resource-allocation choice, now complicated by the rapid pace of technological change. The decision is whether to retrofit AI into existing workflows for quick, incremental gains or to reengineer processes for more transformative but slower results. 10 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG Retrofitting often requires less time and capital, delivering The threat: Organizations that limit agentic AI to incre- faster returns with current technology. Reengineering, in mental improvements may miss transformative opportu- contrast, demands a significant commitment of resources nities. Yet a larger redesign can take considerable resources over a longer period. This extended timeline creates a new and time. risk: The underlying AI technology may advance signifi- The opportunity: Companies that question workflows cantly before the project is complete, potentially rendering around agentic AI can create new capabilities that differ- the new process outdated upon launch. entiate them from competitors. This forces a complex trade-off. Committing to a long- term reengineering project means not only forgoing other, faster optimization projects but also betting on the lon- A Strategic Overhaul of Workflows, gevity of today’s technology. It may be more strategic to Governance, Roles, and Investment make smaller, incremental improvements now and delib- erately skip a technological generation, waiting for a more The tensions created by agentic AI’s dual nature demand powerful or stable platform before committing to a com- a strategic response that goes beyond incremental adjust- plete overhaul. How should leaders decide when to incre- ment. Unlike technologies that can be managed within mentally improve a process versus when to reengineer it traditional functional silos, agentic AI cuts across inter- entirely around the AI’s capabilities? nal organizational boundaries. For example, it requires IT Goodwill’s use of AI for sorting textiles at first appears to expertise for technical deployment, HR-like frameworks be a simple process improvement. However, Preston’s com- for performance management, financial models for hybrid ments reveal a much larger ambition. The complexity of the investment, legal oversight for autonomous decision- organization’s operation, with its billions of unique items and making, and business unit coordination for workflow numerous decision points, suggests that AI’s potential isn’t integration. None of the four fundamental tensions can just in doing a single task faster but in fundamentally chang- be resolved by any single function acting alone; each one ing the entire flow of goods. This presents a dilemma: Should requires new forms of executive collaboration that tran- the organization use AI to simply sort better, or to redesign scend the departmental boundaries that have defined orga- its entire supply chain, from donation to final sale or recy- nizations’ structures since the beginning of industrialization. cling? Preston says that Goodwill is actively redesigning its operations to better utilize its sorting AI. “The whole process The tensions expose not just operational challenges but stra- of identifying what the good is, what the best home for that tegic questions about how organizations create value, struc- good is, and then how to route it can involve any number of ture themselves, govern decision-making, and manage both AI applications,” he notes. A seemingly incremental appli- human and nonhuman contributors over time. Executives cation of AI (sorting) opened the door to a complete reengi- are compelled to ask whether agentic AI is intended only to neering of the supply chain following a questioning of the reduce costs or could cover a broader set of values as a source very structure of a decades-old, human-centric workflow. of innovation, differentiation, and organizational learning. Organizations must treat agentic AI systems with the same oversight typically reserved for human employees. The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 11 Their answer will determine how they design processes, operating model compared with 42% of those that have structures, governance, and workforce strategies. no plans to adopt. (see appendix figure 1, page 19.) This statistic masks a more complex reality: Successful organiza- Once executives have defined the values they want from tions don’t resolve the scope and flexibility tensions. They agentic AI, whether efficiency, growth, innovation, or some design workflows that can oscillate between efficiency and mix, they must address five interlocking implications to adaptability without breaking. move from awareness to action. Naomi Lariviere, chief product owner at ADP, offers an 1. Redesigning Work: Move example of this approach. Rather than choosing between Beyond Incrementalism retrofitting payroll tasks or reengineering the entire process, The rise of agentic AI will reshape not just isolated tasks but ADP built its own “agent-building platform” that enables entire workflows. For CEOs, the central question is no lon- both, simultaneously. Individual payroll tasks can be opti- ger “Where can I automate a step?” but rather “How will pro- mized for efficiency (addressing scalability needs) while the cess design itself fundamentally change?” Agentic systems platform architecture allows the rapid deployment of new don’t simply make existing steps proceed faster; they invite capabilities as tax rules change across hundreds of locales leaders to rethink the design of whole workflows, blending (addressing adaptability needs). The platform doesn’t elimi- human judgment and machine autonomy in ways that legacy nate the tension between efficiency and flexibility. It creates processes were never built to accommodate. infrastructure for managing both demands continuously. Executives should reflect on the scale of this change. If an People believe that AI will do twice as much of their jobs organization has 500 processes, how many will be reimag- in three years. Currently, people feel that AI is doing 23% ined — 50? 200? 400? Organizations with extensive agentic more of the tasks within their jobs compared with a year AI adoption suggest that the answer is far closer to the ago. However, in three years, people expect that AI will high end. Our research finds that 66% of organizations be able to do 46% of their job tasks. Processes will need with extensive agentic AI adoption expect changes to their to change. People believe that AI will do twice as much of their jobs in three years. Currently, people feel that AI is doing 23% more of the tasks within their jobs compared with a year ago. However, in three years, people expect that AI will be able to do 46% of their job tasks. Processes will need to change. 12 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG Similarly, Goodwill’s experience reveals how organizations Agentic systems fall somewhere in between: They are can prepare for scope escalation rather than trying to pre- owned like assets, but they act in ways that require over- vent it. Over time, textile-sorting AI may lead to a major sight, akin to employees. The question for managers is no reengineering of the supply chain. Nonetheless, Goodwill longer “How do we set guardrails for tools?” but “How do is heavily focused on incremental improvements to exist- we assign decision rights, accountability, and oversight to ing approaches to optimize sorting as the organization actors we own but don’t fully control?” looks to a more transformational process with AI. Our data shows that 58% of leading agentic AI organiza- Almost all organizations adopting agentic AI expect sig- tions expect governance structure changes within three nificant process redesign, but organizations further along years, with expectations that AI systems will have decision- in agentic AI adoption are more likely (66%) to expect making authority growing 250%. (see figure 3, page 9 changes in how they are organized and redefine jobs than and appendix figure 1, page 18.) These organizations organizations just beginning adoption (42%). Considering aren’t solving the supervision-versus-autonomy dilemma. how early all organizations are in agentic AI adoption, this They’re creating governance structures that can handle difference is important. Ultimately, agentic AI use is allow- permanent ambiguity about who or what is responsible for ing organizations to build new ways to work instead of just making decisions. adding AI to their old routines. The control tension manifests most clearly in how individ- How to actively manage these competing demands: ual organizations simultaneously implement contradictory › Build processes with embedded options. ADP’s approaches. Kapireddy describes deploying both human- agent-building platform enables both standardized in-the-loop and human-out-of-the loop systems at Truist efficiency and rapid customization across hundreds of Bank, depending on risk levels, with AI systems managed locales. Organizations should design workflows that can as both supervised workers (needing human oversight) shift between efficiency and adaptability modes rather and autonomous tools (operating independently).2 It isn’t than optimizing for one approach. a strategic choice between approaches; it is an acknowledg- ment that agentic AI systems require both management › Plan for scope escalation. Goodwill’s textile-sorting philosophies simultaneously. AI revealed the need for complete supply chain reengi- neering. Organizations should establish clear processes To provide proper supervision, organizations must recognize for determining when incremental AI improvements that AI agents, like workers, need to be trained and coached. should trigger broader redesign discussions, rather than Vibhor Rastogi, head of AI and APAC investments at Citi treating scope expansion as project failure. Ventures, makes this explicit. “As we’re looking at startups in › the space,” he says, “we still feel that these AI agents should Staff teams with both specialists and orchestrators. be treated like coworkers who need to be trained, coached, Since our research shows that 43% of extensive adopters supervised. There is some level of supervision, some level anticipate hiring generalists in place of specialists and of monitoring, some level of oversight that will still have to 45% anticipate a reduction in layers of middle manage- be provided.” Yet, organizations also deploy these systems ment, organizations should assign teams that include both precisely because they can work autonomously, so a funda- efficiency optimization specialists and process redesign mental contradiction results: systems that must be super- generalists. (see appendix figure 1, pages 19 and 20.) vised like employees but owned like equipment. 2. Governance and Decision Rights: Executives must design governance systems that can Making Decisions and Setting Rules apply varying degrees of control depending on the risks, Agentic AI creates a governance dilemma unlike any stakes, and context. This is less about finding balance once previous technology’s. Tools are owned and predictable, than it is about building governance capabilities that can whereas people are autonomous and must be supervised. continuously adapt. The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 13 How to actively manage these competing demands: layers. This isn’t simply a workforce adjustment; it implies › broader organizational redesign. If agents coordinate work- Clarify decision rights. Organizations should create flows, traditional managerial spans of control increase and governance structures that accommodate both supervi- the number of hierarchical layers decreases. The net effect sion and autonomy. Just as Kapireddy describes using is flatter organizations where fewer people manage more both human-in-the-loop and human-out-of-the-loop workers, with human managers increasingly responsible for for the same AI systems, businesses should establish orchestrating hybrid teams of humans and agents. formal processes where IT, HR, and business units reg- ularly negotiate AI authority boundaries. This approach Agentic adoption also reshapes workforce composition. avoids treating decision rights as static and making per- When agents learn and adapt across functions, demand rises manent control decisions, and acknowledges that auton- for generalists who can span domains and work across sys- omy levels will differ by workflows. tems. When agents take on routine tasks, organizations need › Build centralized governance infrastructure fewer entry-level employees. This isn’t traditional workforce before deploying autonomous agents. Since 250% optimization. It is a recognition that organizations are now growth is expected in AI decision-making authority, managing both people and nonhuman contributors, requir- organizations should follow SAP’s model of creating ing a recalibration of hiring, roles, and career paths. governance hubs with enterprisewide guardrails before The data on AI roles reflects this complex scenario. Survey deploying autonomous systems across business units. respondents expect AI to become more like assistants or colleagues and mentors or coaches over the next three 3. Organizational Structure and Strategic years. (see figure 2, page 6.) This role evolution doesn’t Workforce Planning: Redefine Roles, resolve the question of whether AI is a worker or tool. Not Just Skills It multiplies the identity categories organizations must Traditional organizational design has been built around manage simultaneously. These developments will chal- humans: spans of control, layers of management, and lenge existing notions of career progression. Promotion career paths all focused on human effort. Agentic systems and compensation systems built around routine analysis upend this logic. The question for executives is no longer or coordination may become obsolete, forcing organi- just “What skills do we need?” but “What should the struc- zations to reward new capabilities: orchestrating hybrid ture of our organization look like when humans and agents teams, managing exceptions, and providing ethical over- are working side by side?” sight, for example. In this future, “generalist” does not Our survey data points to the beginnings of structural change. mean junior or inexperienced; it describes leaders who As noted, among organizations with extensive agentic AI can span domains, manage ambiguity, and supervise adoption, 45% expect reductions in middle management human-AI collaboration at scale. Traditional organizational design has been built around humans. Agentic systems upend this logic. 14 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG At organizations with extensive agentic AI adoption, 95% On the agentic side, these systems can become more valu- of respondents indicate AI has positively impacted their job able with experience, creating a compounding effect if satisfaction, suggesting that embracing rather than resolv- properly managed. Organizations need to treat agents not ing this identity confusion creates better outcomes than as static tools but as dynamic participants with life cycles trying to narrowly categorize AI. of their own that require structured support similar to that afforded to human employees. How to actively manage these competing demands: › Reshape organizational structures. The organiza- tional shifts expected point to a need to plan for flatter hierarchies and wider spans of control and redefine man- agerial roles to focus less on information brokering and more on orchestrating hybrid human-AI teams. › Create dual career paths in workforce pipelines. Of the organizations with extensive AI adoption, 43% plan to hire more generalists and 29% expect fewer entry-level roles. (see appendix figure 1, page 20.) This suggests BLENDING TOOL AND WORKER that organizations should establish distinct advancement IN A SINGLE SYSTEM paths for both AI-augmented specialists and AI orches- trators, acknowledging that both roles are essential. Sun at SAP sees agentic AI developing an expertise that affords a human-worker level of expertise to handle complex › Plan for AI’s evolving role in teams. Organizations tasks. “The way I see it is that if you had a choice of access- expect AI to increasingly act as a coach or mentor. To ing a very large encyclopedia or the alternative of a person prepare, they can build workforce models and leadership who’s an expert in a particular task, which one would you development programs that anticipate these role shifts to pick? We feel that for a lot of our business tasks, we need that ensure that humans are ready to collaborate with agents expert,” he explains. “And that’s why we feel that by being able in more guidance- and judgment-oriented roles. to fine-tune and create these smaller language models, we get that expertise built into an AI agent.” The initial model (the 4. Upskilling, Learning Loops, and encyclopedia) is a depreciating fixed asset, but through the Life-Cycle Management: Building ongoing process of fine-tuning, it becomes a more valuable, flexible “expert.” Human and Agent Capacity To augment entrepreneurs’ expertise with expertise in areas Agentic AI use reshapes how organizations must think outside their core strengths, Alibaba.com developed a four- about learning and development on two fronts. First, agent system (product listing, communication, marketing, employees require upskilling, not only in the technical and risk management) for small businesses. But the agents use of AI systems but in the supervision, critique, and aren’t tied to a fixed way of working. Instead, company pres- orchestration of them. Second, the agents themselves need ident Kuo Zhang notes, “each of the agents can beat 90% of life-cycle management (onboarding, training, retraining, the real humans doing this job. The more you work with the and eventual retirement) if they are to remain reliable and agent, the more it understands your business.” The develop- valuable. Executives should continually ask themselves, ment initially required tool-like design but retained benefits “How are we ensuring that our people and agents are con- normally associated with human workers. With increased tinuously learning?” experience, the agents are learning more and more about specific situations. As a result, small entrepreneurs can On the human side, traditional reskilling has focused on increasingly use the agents to handle problems they face in teaching people to operate tools. But working alongside their own contexts. agents demands broader capabilities: Employees must know when to trust outputs, when to challenge them, and how to integrate them into team workflows. The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 15 Connor notes that at Chevron, model updates arrive for continuous reinvestment in systems. Financial models “every couple of months,” underscoring the need for ongo- should be flexible enough to account for rapid upgrades, ing vigilance to keep systems current. Natarajan points to retraining, and replacement, without locking organiza- continuous reinvestment in fine-tuning at Capital One, to tions into static depreciation schedules. ensure that agents don’t drift off course. If organizations Unlike most capital investments, agentic AI can appreci- fail to actively care for their agents, the systems will quickly ate with use. As managers fine-tune agents, expose them become outdated, inaccurate, or even risky. to more data, and embed them in workflows, agentic sys- Just as HR teams recruit, onboard, train, evaluate, and tems can become more effective. While most technologies eventually retire employees, organizations adopting agen- plateau or decline in usefulness over time, agentic systems tic AI need parallel support functions for their nonhuman can gain value the more they are used, in spite of possi- workforce. These functions include onboarding processes ble model drift or technology changes. Organizations can (testing and validating new agents), performance reviews use these systems to become more proactive, spot mar- (tracking agents’ accuracy, adaptability, and bias), and ket signals earlier, and compete on differentiation rather retraining (fine-tuning agents as new data becomes avail- than just efficiency. This appreciation requires a strategic able). Some companies are experimenting with assigning departure from traditional investment logic. explicit accountability for this. Moderna, for instance, Organizations should anchor investments in customer and merged its tech and HR departments, thus making it clear value perspectives. The question is not simply how to fund that agents must be managed as part of the workforce, not AI but what value it is meant to deliver — whether that just IT infrastructure.3 is cost efficiency, faster innovation, or deeper customer How to actively manage these competing demands: engagement. Our research shows that organizations fur- › ther along in adoption are much more likely to expect fun- Upskill humans to orchestrate, not just operate. damental changes in how they differentiate competitively. Organizations must train employees to supervise, redi- This demands that their investment choices be directly rect, and critique agent outputs, not just consume them. tied to strategic goals rather than dispersed across a patch- › Redesign onboarding. Agents should be embedded work of disconnected projects. into training programs so new hires learn to work with How to actively manage these competing demands: them from day 1. › › Build for adaptability. Organizations must assume Create an “HR for agents” function. Organizations that there will be rapid technology shifts and therefore must assign responsibility for recruiting, onboarding, should design budgets and systems that can incorporate evaluating, retraining, and retiring AI agents, just as HR switching costs and support continuous retraining. provides those functions for humans. › Create investment review processes that accom- 5. Investment Strategy: Budgeting modate functional disagreement/joint alignment for Permanent Uncertainty across businesses. Organizations should establish Traditional investment frameworks assume that organiza- monthly review cycles where IT, finance, HR, and busi- tions can choose between competing approaches: capital ness units can advocate for contradictory investment versus operational expenses, short-term versus long-term approaches without requiring consensus. returns, centralized versus distributed spending. But › Develop metrics that track competing sources because agentic investments cut across these categories, of value creation. Organizations should measure AI organizations need financial architectures that can accom- systems as appreciating assets (learning capabilities, modate multiple investment approaches. expanded applications) and depreciating tools (model Agentic AI’s swift evolution requires adaptability. With drift, technological obsolescence) simultaneously and the rapid emergence of new models and features, invest- accept that such metrics will sometimes point in oppo- ment decisions must anticipate switching costs and plan site directions. 16 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG Conclusion With agentic AI, leaders are managing a new entity with- a unified framework. Agentic AI elevates human judgment out historical precedent. It is a tool that learns, a worker rather than eliminating it. Strategic oversight, ethical gov- that is owned, and an investment that behaves like both ernance, and the ability to orchestrate human-AI teams tool and worker. Agentic AI does not fit neatly within become the most critical human skills as AI agents handle the substitute-or-complement framework because it tasks previously performed by human workers. The organi- demands to be managed as both a worker and a tool at zations that thrive will be those that focus less on the tech- once. The substitute-complement framework asks, “Is AI nology itself and more on the human systems that surround replacing coworkers or augmenting them?” But agentic AI it. This forces a deeply unsettling question for today’s leaders: forces a more unsettling question: “How do we manage “Are we simply adding a new tool to our business, or are we artificial colleagues that we own like equipment but must introducing a new, nonhuman actor into our organization?” supervise like people, and that depreciate like machinery How we respond will define the next era of management. but learn like humans?” This new technology creates crit- ical design challenges. Companies beginning to use agentic AI are already grap- pling with that question. Some are treating it primarily as a way to reduce costs whereas others are using it to expand capacity, speed up experimentation, or elevate the baseline performance of their people. Leaders need to be explicit about what they are optimizing for and design their pro- cesses, structures, and governance accordingly. Treating an agentic AI deployment like a traditional tool misses its flexibility advantages, but treating it like a newly hired staff member underestimates the infrastructure requirements. This dual risk creates unavoidable tensions between flexibility and efficiency, control and autonomy, and upfront investment and continuous learning. Success will be defined not by eliminating these conflicts but by mastering them. The challenge of agentic AI is organizational, not techno- logical. Many organizations are adopting this technology at a breakneck pace, often before they have a coherent strat- egy in place. But the speed of adoption is not a measure of progress. Advantage will not come from having the best AI injected into the organization as quickly as possible but from having the best answer to the question, “How do we reorganize our organization around it?” The “adopt now, strategize later” approach is a high-stakes gamble that avoids the hard work of identifying a purpose for agentic AI that fits well with the organization’s strategy. Ultimately, this challenge is deeply human and requires that businesses break down organizational silos. The era of managing technology solely within the IT department is over; governance is now a mandatory, cross-functional effort where IT, HR, finance, and operations must collaborate on The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 17 % 80 AP70PENDIX 60 58% 57% 1. Use of Agentic A51I% and 50 48% 46% Organizatio4n2%al4 3C%hange 42% 44% 40 37% 39% As organizations increase their adoption of agentic AI, 34%D 3 e 5 c % is3i1o%n-making: How does the use of agentic AI relate 30 28% they expect significant and widespread changes across the to the processes, accountability, and rules that guide how bus2in0ess. Our data reveals a consistent, direct relationship: an organization makes choices? Compared with organiza- The greater the level of agentic AI adoption, the higher the tions that have no plans to adopt agentic AI, the companies 10 percentage of organizations that anticipate fundamental that are already making extensive use of the technology shift0s in decision-making, structure, talent strategy, and foresee bigger changes in how they will make decisions. competitive diffeAre cnhtainagtei oinn . An increase in the IncreaFsoedr ehuxmamanp le, the expectation of a change in governance governance structure time horizon accountability for structure in three years is 37% among those with no plans (decision-making rights) considered in decision-making in three years decision-making but 58% among those already using agentic AI extensively. Similarly, the belief that the time horizon for decisions is changing is 42% versus 46%, respectively. Our organization’s use of AI leads to ... % % 80 80 70 70 66% 62% 60 60 53% 58% 57% 51% 51% 50 50 4 4 2 2 % % 43% 42% 44% 48% 39% 4 4 6 1 % % 45% 40 40 37% 37% 39% 30% 34%35% 31% 30 30 28% 20 20 10 10 0 0 A change in our organization’s A reduction in A change in An increase in the Increased human operating model/ layers of middle governance structure time horizon accountability for definition of roles and management (decision-making rights) considered in decision-making responsibilities in three years decision-making Decision-making APPENDIX FIGURE 1 How AI Will Reshape Organizations R%espondents at different stages of agentic AI adoption No plans to adopt agentic AI Some adoption of agentic AI were asked whether they believe the technology will shape 80 decision-making, organizational structure, talent strategy, Plans to adopt agentic AI Extensive adoption of agentic AI a7n0d competitive differentiation a6t6 t%heir company. 62% Piloting agentic AI 60 53% 51% 50 45% 42% 41% 39% 40 37% 30% 18 MIT S3L0OAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG 20 10 0 A change in our organization’s A reduction in operating model/ layers of middle definition of roles and management responsibilities No plans to adopt agentic AI Some adoption of agentic AI Plans to adopt agentic AI Extensive adoption of agentic AI Piloting agentic AI % 80 70 60 58% 57% 51% 50 48% 46% 42%43% 42% 44% 40 37% 39% Organizational structure: How does the use of agentic3 4%35% 31% 3A0I relate to an organization’s hierarchy, roles, and ov2e8r%all operating model? The data links higher agentic AI adop- 20 tion to a greater anticipation of structural reorganization. 10 The expectation of a change in the operating model and a r0edefinition of roles is 42% in organizations with no plans to adopt agenA tcihca nAgeI icno mpared wAni tinhc r6e6as%e i na mtheo ng thosIen creased human using it exgtoevnersniavnecley .s tLruikcetuwrei se, the pteimrcee hnotraizgoen o f organizaa-ccountability for (decision-making rights) considered in decision-making tions that expect to see a reduction in the layers of middle in three years decision-making management is 30% versus 45%, respectively. In 3 years, our organization’s use of AI will lead to ... % 80 70 66% 62% 60 53% 51% 50 45% 42% 41% 39% 40 37% 30% 30 20 10 0 A change in our organization’s A reduction in operating model/ layers of middle definition of roles and management responsibilities Organizational structure No plans to adopt agentic AI Some adoption of agentic AI Plans to adopt agentic AI Extensive adoption of agentic AI Piloting agentic AI The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 19 % 80 70 60 58% 57% 51% 50 48% 46% 42%43% 42% 44% 40 37% 39% 34%35% 31% 30 28% Talent strategy: With increasing use of agentic AI, how will organizations have to change how they hire, develop, 20 and manage talent? Increased AI adoption positively cor- 10 relates with the expectation of shifts in how companies 0 manage their workforces. In organizations with increased A change in An increase in the Increaasgeedn htuimc aAnI adoption, people are more likely to anticipate governance structure time horizon accouan tmaboilivtye ftoor ward hiring generalists over specialists (28% (decision-making rights) considered in decision-making in three years decision-making among those with no plans and 43% among those with extensive plans). In 3 years, our organization’s % use of AI will lead to ... 80 % 70 66% 62% 80 60 53% 51% 70 50 45% 42% 41% 60 39% 40 37% 30% 50 43% 30 41%40% 38% 40 36%36% 20 30 27% 33% 30% 27% 29% 26% 26% 30% 28% 33% 29% 25% 31% 28%29% 32% 23% 23% 10 21% 20 0 10 A change in our organization’s A reduction in operating model/ layers of middle 0 definition of roles and management responsibilities A preference for hiring Lower investments in A reduction in the Providing a long-term Being more open or contractors training employees hiring of entry-level career path for willing to hire over employees employees employees generalists in place of specialists Talent strategy No plans to adopt agentic AI Some adoption of agentic AI Plans to adopt agentic AI Extensive adoption of agentic AI Piloting agentic AI % 80 76% 73% 70 60 58%59% 57%57% 53%54% 53% 49% 20 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG 50 40 30 20 10 0 Our ability to Individuals’ ability to differentiate our differentiate organization themselves from their from others human coworkers % 80 70 60 50 43% 41%40% 38% 40 36%36% 30 27% 33% 30% 27% 29% 26% 26% 30% 28% 3 C 3% om29p%etitive 2 d 5% iff 3 e 1 r % entiation: 2If8 %ev2e9r%yo 32 n % e uses agentic 23% 23% 21% AI, how will organizations and individuals stand out? 20 This category shows the most pronounced differences in 10 expectations. Organizations overwhelmingly believe that as AI adoption becomes extensive, it will alter how both 0 companies and individuals stand out. The expectation A preference for hiring Lower investments in A reduction in the Providing a long-term Being more open or contractors training employees hiring of entryt-hleavte lA I will cchaarneegre p aatnh foorrg anization’wsi lalibngil tiot yh itroe differen- over employees employees employees generalists in place tiate itself is 53% for those with no agentic AI adoption of specialists plans compared with 73% among those using it exten- sively. Most significantly, the belief that AI will affect an individual’s ability to differentiate themselves from coworkers shows the largest gap, at 49% versus 76%. Our organization’s use of AI leads to ... % 80 76% 73% 70 60 58%59% 57%57% 53%54% 53% 49% 50 40 30 20 10 0 Our ability to Individuals’ ability to differentiate our differentiate organization themselves from their from others human coworkers Competitive differentiation The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 21 2. Working With AI Versus Working With Humans Our research compares how working with humans, gener- (by 16%), reinforcing the idea that AI collaboration is ative AI, and traditional AI affects five performance attri- well suited to performance-based tasks. In contrast, butes. Both AI types are superior to human coworkers both generative AI and traditional AI are seen as highly for enhancing performance metrics. For instance, 90% of unlikely to reduce speed or efficiency, with expectations respondents reported an increase in speed when working of decreases at only 2%-3%. However, traditional AI is with generative AI, and 89% saw a boost in efficiency, seen as the most likely collaborator to stifle creativity (by compared with only 48% and 58%, respectively, from 13% of respondents) and curiosity (by 10%). This suggests collaborating with humans. More notably, respondents a trade-off: While human collaboration may be slower, it’s believe that generative AI also outperforms humans in least likely to dampen creativity, whereas traditional AI stimulating certain cognitive traits, with 79% believing boosts performance but at a greater risk to creative and that GenAI boosts people’s curiosity (versus 71% feel- curious exploration. ing that way about other humans) and 68% believing Overall, our findings also indicate a strong positive cor- that GenAI increases people’s agency (versus 57% for relation between the adoption of agentic AI and employee humans). While humans maintain an edge in fostering job satisfaction. Organizations with the most extensive AI creativity (77%), generative AI is a close second at 76%, adoption report the highest levels of satisfaction, with 95% significantly higher than traditional AI’s 58%. Overall, of individuals at organizations with the most extensive the data suggests that while traditional AI is valued pri- agentic AI adoption reporting AI positively impacting their marily for speed and efficiency, respondents view gener- job satisfaction. This correlation suggests that as companies ative AI as a partner that enhances both performance and more deeply integrate sophisticated, autonomous AI, it can human-centric qualities like curiosity and agency. lead to more fulfilling work and higher job satisfaction, pos- Conversely, the data on negative effects of each collabo- sibly by automating tedious tasks and allowing employees ration type for each attribute reveals the potential down- to focus on more strategic activities. sides. Working with humans is viewed as most likely to decrease speed (by 22% of respondents) and efficiency 22 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG FFoorr ppeeooppllee iinn mmyy ffuunnccttiioonnaall aarreeaa,, hhooww ddooeess wwoorrkkiinngg wwiitthh AAII ccoommppaarree ttoo wwoorrkkiinngg wwiitthh hhuummaannss?? 4% 84% 2% Speed 90% 22% 48% 3% 86% 2% Efficiency 89% 16% 58% 10% 65% For people in my functional area, how does working 8% Curiosity 79% with AI compare to working with humans? 7% 71% 13% 58% 10% Creativity 76% 4% 7% 84% 77% 2% Speed 90% 9% 55% 22% 48% 8% Agency 68% 3% 9% 86% 57% 2% Efficiency 89% 16% 58% 10% 30 20 1605% 0 % 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 8% Curiosity 79% 7% Decrease 71% Increase 13% 58% 10% Creativity 76% 7% 77% Traditional AI Generative AI Human 9% 55% 8% Agency 68% 9% 57% APPENDIX FIGURE 2 How Working With AI Affects 30 20 10 0 % 0 10 20 30 40 V5a0rious H6u0man C7o0mpeten80cies 90 100 Working with AI primarily increases Decrease Increase speed and efficiency. Traditional AI Generative AI Human The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 23 3. Agentic AI Adoption and Decision-Making Organizations with the highest level of agentic AI adop- tion are far more likely to see increased applications of the technology across various modes of decision-making. But the largest impact of agentic adoption is augmenting human judgment: Seventy-nine percent of extensive agentic AI adopters say they are investing in using AI to generate insights for a human decision maker. In contrast, fully autonomous scenarios where “AI decides and imple- ments” are significantly less common, peaking at 54% in the same group. This indicates that experienced organi- zations are currently primarily investing in using AI as an analytical partner to augment human oversight rather than as an independent decision maker. 24 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG % %80 79% 80 79% 70 68% 70 68% 61% 60% 60 61% 56% 60% 60 54% 56% 52% 54% 50 48% 52% 45% 50 48% 42% 45% 40 42% 40 33% 33% 32% 30 33% 33% 32% 27% 26% 25% 30 24% 24% 27% 22%26% 20 19% 25% 20% 24% 24% 19% 22% 20% 20 19% 19% 12% 12% 10 8%12% 12% 10 8% 0 0 AI decides and AI decides, AI recommends, AI generates insights, Human generates, implements human implements human decides human uses in AI evaluates AI decides and AI decides, AI recommends, AI generates insights, Human generates, a decision process implements human implements human decides human uses in AI evaluates a decision process AI dominant Percentage of respondents with varying extents of agentic AI adoption who report investment in five human-AI interaction modes. Human dominant AI dominant Percentage of respondents with varying extents of agentic AI adoption who report investment in five human-AI interaction modes. Human dominant APPENDIX FIGURE 3 Investment in Five Human-AI Interaction Modes The largest investment in agentic AI is to augment human judgment. No plans to adopt agentic AI Some adoption of agentic AI No plans to adopt agentic AI Some adoption of agentic AI Plans to adopt agentic AI Extensive adoption of agentic AI Plans to adopt agentic AI Extensive adoption of agentic AI Piloting agentic AI Piloting agentic AI The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 25 4. Hopes and Fears About Task Replacement Do people hope or fear that AI will take over some of their 78% and 85%. At the same time, fear about AI performing job tasks within five years? The data shows that as organi- these tasks stays relatively low, ranging from 21% to 32%. zations adopt more capable AI, people’s feelings of hope This pattern is consistent with a longer-term trend: Hope and fear do not significantly change. Across all stages of increased from 70% in 2017 to 84% in 2024, while fear agentic AI adoption, from companies with no plans to decreased from 31% in 2017 to 20% in 2024. Ultimately, those with extensive implementations, the hope that AI greater exposure to AI in the workplace does not appear to will handle certain tasks remains high, fluctuating between substantially alter these sentiments. I hope AI will do some of the current tasks in my job in five years. No plans to adopt agentic AI 83% Plans to adopt agentic AI 85% Piloting agentic AI 78% Some adoption of agentic AI 78% Extensive adoption of agentic AI 79% I fear AI will do some of the current tasks in my job in five years. No plans to adopt agentic AI 29% Plans to adopt agentic AI 21% Piloting agentic AI 30% Some adoption of agentic AI 29% Extensive adoption of agentic AI 32% Percentage of respondents who agree or strongly agree with each statement. APPENDIX FIGURE 4 AI Hope Continues to Outpace Fear Organizations at all levels of agentic AI adoption are more hopeful than fearful that AI will automate elements of their work. 26 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG 5. Authenticity When organizations replace human tasks and interactions disclose its use. Fifty percent of respondents believe that with automated computer systems, they risk appearing their AI-assisted performance is viewed as entirely their more robotic and less authentic. Human communication own and 51% report that they let others know when they’ve is filled with nuance, empathy, and spontaneity — qualities used AI. This suggests that many people are comfortable that automated systems struggle to replicate. A chatbot or taking full credit for AI’s contributions, which raises ques- an AI-generated email, for example, can feel impersonal tions about workplace transparency and what it means to and scripted, lacking the genuine connection of a conver- be authentic. Authenticity also varies with power dynamics. sation with a real person. As a result, agentic AI adoption Perceptions of inauthenticity change depending on who could make an organization seem distant and cold, particu- is using the AI. Only 35% of respondents feel that their larly when handling sensitive customer or employee issues, leaders become less authentic when using AI to commu- where empathy is crucial. Overreliance on automation can nicate. Meanwhile, 23% of respondents consider their erode the human touch — the qualities that build trust and own direct reports to be less authentic when they use AI to make an organization seem authentic and relatable. make decisions. These figures indicate that employees are Our findings indicate some support for this concern. There less skeptical of AI’s role in critical decision-making, espe- is a tension between using AI for efficiency and maintaining cially by subordinates, than they are of its use in top-down a sense of genuine human ownership and decision-making. communication. It highlights that the type of task being There’s also a notable disconnect between how people automated heavily influences whether the outcome is per- present their AI-assisted work and their willingness to ceived as authentic. When my direct reports use AI to make decisions, I feel that their decision-making becomes less authentic. 23% When my organization’s leaders use AI to communicate, I feel that their leadership becomes less authentic. 35% When using AI to do my work, others view my performance as wholly my own. 50% When using AI to do my work, I let others know I’ve used AI. 51% % 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Percentage of respondents who agree or strongly agree with each statement. APPENDIX FIGURE 5 How Using AI Affects Authenticity Respondents are generally not concerned about a lack of authenticity when using AI. The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 27 6. The Emerging Agent-to-Agent Ecosystem Originally, managers designed companies around human AI adoption. This pattern also holds for external processes. interaction. Increasingly, they are preparing for auton- The readiness to allow AI agents to interact with outside omous AI agents to interact directly with one another, a partners grows significantly with adoption levels, at just trend that correlates strongly with agentic AI adoption. Our 17% in the pilot phase but 27% among extensive adopters. research shows that as organizations move beyond initial This difference underscores that as companies integrate AI trials, they prioritize enabling this capability. For example, more deeply into their operations, they see a greater need while we find that only 30% of companies in the agentic for agents to autonomously manage tasks like negotiating AI pilot stage enable internal agent-to-agent interaction, with suppliers or coordinating logistics. that figure is 52% for organizations with extensive agentic My organization enables AI agents to interact with each other without human involvement in internal processes Piloting agentic AI 30% Some adoption of agentic AI 32% Extensive adoption of agentic AI 52% My organization enables AI agents from other organizations to interact with our organization’s AI agents without human involvement Piloting agentic AI 17% Some adoption of agentic AI 20% Extensive adoption of agentic AI 27% Respondents who agree or strongly agree with each statement. APPENDIX FIGURE 6 Agentic AI Adopters Are More Ready for Agent-to-Agent Interaction While organizational readiness for fully autonomous AI agents is still nascent, a larger percentage of organizations with extensive agentic AI adoption are ready for their agents to interact externally. 28 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG 7. AI Will Do More Current Tasks Than New Tasks An organization’s adoption of agentic AI directly cor- no plans versus 49% in those with extensive adoption. relates with what employees expect AI to do in the next There is a similar difference for new tasks, at 11% and 39%, three years. As companies advance from having no plans respectively. At the highest level of adoption, a notable gap for agentic AI to extensive implementation, employees emerges, as significantly more people believe that AI will increasingly anticipate that AI will perform both their take over their current work (49%) versus performing new current tasks and new tasks. For example, the expectation kinds of work (39%). People may find it easier to envision that AI will do current tasks is 15% in organizations with AI performing familiar tasks rather than unfamiliar ones. Agentic AI adoption AI will do current tasks No plans to adopt agentic AI 15% Plans to adopt agentic AI 21% Piloting agentic AI 28% Some adoption of agentic AI 31% Extensive adoption of agentic AI 49% AI will do new tasks that are are not currently being done at all No plans to adopt agentic AI 11% Plans to adopt agentic AI 20% Piloting agentic AI 27% Some adoption of agentic AI 29% Extensive adoption of agentic AI 39% Percentage of respondents who agree or strongly agree. APPENDIX FIGURE 7 Agentic AI Adopters Believe AI Will Do More Current Tasks Than New Tasks An organization’s adoption of agentic AI directly correlates with how much of both current and new tasks employees expect AI to do three years from now. The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 29 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank each of the following individuals, who were interviewed for this report: Aparna Chennapragada chief product officer, Microsoft Experiences and Devices, Microsoft Margery Connor chief data and analytics officer, Chevron Rebecca Finlay CEO, Partnership on AI Naomi Lariviere chief product owner, ADP Prem Natarajan executive vice president, chief scientist, and head of enterprise AI, Capital One Steve Preston CEO, Goodwill Industries International Huiming Qu vice president, data science, The Home Depot Vibhor Rastogi head of AI and APAC investments, Citi Ventures Jeff Reihl executive vice president and technology chairman, LexisNexis Legal & Professional Walter Sun senior vice president and global head of AI, SAP Kuo Zhang president, Alibaba.com 30 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG REFERENCES 1 S. Ransbotham and S. Khodabandeh, hosts, “Overcoming AI Hallucinations: Truist’s Chandra Kapireddy,” “Me, Myself, and AI,” podcast, season 11, episode 3 (April 15, 2025), MIT Sloan Management Review, https://sloanreview.mit.edu. 2 Ibid. 3 I. Bousquette, “Why Moderna Merged Its Tech and HR Departments,” The Wall Street Journal, May 12, 2005, www.wsj.com. i C. Halton, “Diffusion of Innovations Theory: Definition and Examples,” Investopedia, May 27, 2025, www.investopedia.com. The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 31 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW At MIT Sloan Management Review, we explore how leadership and manage- ment are transforming in a disruptive world. We help thoughtful leaders cap- ture the exciting opportunities — and face down the challenges — created as technological, societal, and environmental forces reshape how organizations operate, compete, and create value. MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW BIG IDEAS MIT Sloan Management Review’s Big Ideas Initiatives develop innovative, original research on the issues transforming our fast-changing business environment. We conduct global surveys and in-depth interviews with front-line leaders working at a range of companies, from Silicon Valley startups to multinational organizations, to deepen our understanding of changing paradigms and their influence on how people work and lead. BOSTON CONSULTING GROUP Boston Consulting Group (BCG) partners with leaders in business and society to tackle their most important challenges and capture their greatest opportunities. BCG was the pioneer in business strategy when it was founded in 1963. Today, we work closely with clients to embrace a transformational approach aimed at benefiting all stakeholders — empowering organizations to grow, build sustainable competitive advantage, and drive positive societal impact. Our diverse, global teams bring deep industry and functional expertise and a range of perspectives that question the status quo and spark change. BCG delivers solutions through leading-edge management consulting, technology and design, and corporate and digital ventures. We work in a uniquely collaborative model across the firm and throughout all levels of the client organization, fueled by the goal of helping our clients thrive and enabling them to make the world a better place. 32 MIT SLOAN MANAGEMENT REVIEW • BCG BCG HENDERSON INSTITUTE The BCG Henderson Institute is Boston Consulting Group’s strategy think tank, dedicated to exploring and developing valuable new insights from business, technology, science, and economics by embracing the powerful technology of ideas. The Institute engages leaders in provocative discussion and experimentation to expand the boundaries of business theory and practice and to translate innovative ideas from within and beyond business. For more ideas and inspiration from the Institute, please visit bcghendersoninstitute.com. BCG X BCG X is the tech build and design unit of BCG. Turbocharging BCG’s deep industry and functional expertise, BCG X brings together advanced tech knowledge and ambitious entrepreneurship to help organizations enable innovation at scale. With nearly 3,000 technologists, scientists, programmers, engineers, and human-centered designers located across 80-plus cities, BCG X builds and designs platforms and software to address the world’s most important challenges and opportunities. Teaming across our practices, and in close collaboration with our clients, our end-to-end global team unlocks new possibilities. Together we’re creating the bold and disruptive products, services, and businesses of tomorrow. Get more on artificial intelligence from MIT Sloan Management Review: Read the report online at https://sloanreview.mit.edu/ai2025 Visit our site at https://sloanreview.mit.edu/big-ideas/artificial-intelligence-business-strategy Get free newsletter updates at https://sloanreview.mit.edu/offers-enews Reproducing or distributing this report requires written permission. To request permission, visit our website at shop.sloanreview.mit.edu or email smr-help@mit.edu The Emerging Agentic Enterprise: How Leaders Must Navigate a New Age of AI 33 sloanreview.mit.edu/big-ideas SLOANREVIEW.MIT.EDU/BIG-IDEAS