REPORT 2025 A matter of choice: People and possibilities in the age of AI People and possibilities in the age of AI A matter of choice Copyright @ 2025 By the United Nations Development Programme 1 UN Plaza, New York, NY 10017 USA REPORT 2025 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without prior permission. Sales no.: E.25.III.B.2 Print ISBN: 9789211576092 PDF ISBN: 9789211542639 Print ISSN: 0969-4501 Online ISSN: 2412-3129 A matter of choice: A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library and Library People and possibilities of Congress in the age of AI General disclaimers. The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Human Development Report Office (HDRO) of the United The 2025 Human Development Report Nations Development Programme (UNDP) concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation The cover and chapter images in the report of its frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and dashed lines on maps represent feature portraits in the artistic styles of various approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement. historical periods and cultures, with subtle allusions to people’s use of technology. The findings, analysis, and recommendations of this Report, as with previous Reports, do not represent the official position of the UNDP or of any of the UN For example, the cover presents a modern Member States that are part of its Executive Board. They are also not necessarily woman with headphones, against a endorsed by those mentioned in the acknowledgments or cited. background with hints of technology in the style of prehistoric cave paintings—an echo of The mention of specific companies does not imply that they are endorsed or humanity’s earliest attempts to understand and recommended by UNDP in preference to others of a similar nature that are not shape the world. mentioned. Combining history with symbols of modern Some of the figures included in the analytical part of the report where indicated technology, the images place humans at the have been estimated by the HDRO or other contributors to the Report and are not centre and aim to bridge the past and future— necessarily the official statistics of the concerned country, area or territory, which positioning today’s breakthroughs in artificial may use alternative methods. All the figures included in the Statistical Annex are intelligence (AI), and the media through which from official sources. All reasonable precautions have been taken by the HDRO to we interact with them, as part of humanity’s verify the information contained in this publication. However, the published material unfolding and open-ended journey towards is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. advancing human development. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. Working with AI, a graphic designer created In no event shall the HDRO and UNDP be liable for damages arising from its use. the images by guiding the system with ideas and creative direction, prompting the AI to The signed contributions in boxes and spotlights represent the opinions of the produce a range of visual outputs that the authors and are the product of independent research of their responsibility. They graphic designer then edited, developed and do not represent necessarily the position or opinions of the Human Development finalized. The artworks themselves reflect how Report Office or UNDP. Any errors or omissions are the authors’ responsibility. They AI could reshape how we do things, unleashing are presented in the report to stimulate debate and to encourage further dialogue new creative possibilities and augmenting what between researchers and decisionmakers. people can do. The cover and other images invite you to pause and reflect—as we navigate Printed in the USA, by AGS, an RR Donnelley Company, on Forest Stewardship Council the uncertainties and possibilities of a world certified and elemental chlorine-free papers. Printed using vegetable-based ink. with AI. People and possibilities in the age of AI A matter of choice HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 A matter of choice People and possibilities in the age of AI HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Team Director and lead author Pedro Conceição Research and statistics Joseph Bak-Coleman, Nabamallika Dehingia, Nicholas Depsky, Pratibha Gautam, Moumita Ghorai, Divya Goyal, Yu-Chieh Hsu, Christina Lengfelder, Brian Lutz, Tasneem Mirza, Prachi Paliwal, Josefin Pasanen, Antonio Reyes González, Som Kumar Shrestha, Ajita Singh, Heriberto Tapia, Yanchun Zhang and Zakaria Zoundi Digital, data and knowledge management, communications, operations, National Human Development Reports Nasantuya Chuluun, Seockhwan Bryce Hwang, Nicole Igloi, Admir Jahic, Fe Juarez Shanahan, Minji Kwag, Ana Porras, Qiamuddin Sabawoon, Stanislav Saling, Marium Soomro and Sajia Wais iii HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 The 2025 Human Development Report Advisory Board Co-chairs Laura Chinchilla A. Michael Spence Former President of Costa Philip H. Knight Professor Rica Emeritus of Management, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University Members Masood Ahmed Deemah AlYahya Kaushik Basu Haroon Bhorat President Emeritus, Secretary-General, Digital Professor of Economics and Professor of Economics and Center for Global Cooperation Organization the Carl Marks Professor Director of the Development Development of International Studies, Policy Research Unit, Cornell University University of Cape Town Diane Coyle Gretchen C. Daily Marc Fleurbaey Paula Ingabire Bennett Professor of Director, Natural Capital Research Director, CNRS; Minister, ICT and Innovation, Public Policy, University of Project and Bing Professor Professor, Paris School Republic of Rwanda Cambridge; Co-Director, of Environmental Science, of Economics; Associate Bennett Institute for Stanford University Professor, Ecole normale Public Policy, University of supérieure, Paris Cambridge Sheila Jasanoff Ravi Kanbur Luis Felipe López-Calva J. Nathan Matias Pforzheimer Professor of T. H. Lee Professor Global Director, Poverty Assistant Professor, Science and Technology of World Affairs, and Equity Global Department of Studies, Harvard Kennedy International Professor of Practice, World Bank Communication, Cornell School Applied Economics and Group University Management and Professor of Economics, Cornell University Arvind Narayanan Rapelang Rabana Francesca Rossi Emma Ruttkamp-Bloem Professor of Computer Co-CEO, Imagine IBM Fellow and the IBM AI Head, Department of Science, Princeton Worldwide Ethics Global Leader, TJ Philosophy and AI Ethics University; Director, Watson Research Center Lead, Center for AI Center for Information Research, University of Technology Policy Pretoria Zeynep Tufekci Krushil Watene Linghan Zhang Henry G. Bryant Professor Peter Kraus Associate Professor, Institute of Data of Sociology and Public Professor in Philosophy, Law, China University of Affairs, Princeton University of Auckland Political Science and Law University Waipapa Taumata Rau Foreword Artificial intelligence (AI) is racing ahead at lightning This people-centred perspective becomes even speed. Yet as AI surges forward, human development more critical in a moment of overlapping global crises. stalls. Decades of progress, reflected in the Human De- It is tempting to believe that AI alone can solve our de- velopment Index, have flatlined, with no clear recovery velopment challenges. But that belief invites compla- from the blows dealt by the Covid-19 pandemic and cency. It asks us to surrender responsibility and ignore subsequent crises. We are at a crossroads: while AI the political, social and systemic barriers that have long promises to redefine our future, it also risks deepening impeded progress. The 2023/2024 Human Develop- the divides of a world already off balance. Are we on the ment Report, Breaking the Gridlock, made it clear: verge of an AI-powered renaissance—or sleepwalking our limitations are not technological but sociological. into a future ruled by inequality and eroded freedoms? Many of the crises and inequalities we face persist not Too often, headlines, policies and public debates fixate because solutions are lacking but because we have on what AI might achieve in some distant future—utopian failed to act. With AI we must choose differently—and or dystopian. These deterministic views are not only we must choose now. disempowering; they are profoundly misleading. They We might resist the temptation to anthropomorphize obscure the fact that the future is being shaped now, by AI, yet in many ways it acts like a mirror—reflecting and the choices we make today. The 2025 Human Develop- amplifying the values, structures and inequalities of the ment Report, A Matter of Choice: People and Possibilities societies that shape it. AI does not act independently in the Age of AI, reminds us that it is people—not ma- of us; it evolves through our decisions and our priori- chines—who determine which technologies thrive, how ties. If we fail to address the injustices and divides that they are used and whom they serve. AI’s impact will be persist today, AI will only entrench them further. But if defined not by what it can do but by the decisions we we invest in human capabilities and commit to greater make in its design, development and deployment. equity, AI can magnify the best of what humanity can Central to these decisions is how we view the role achieve. Ultimately, the 2025 Human Development Re- of people in an AI-driven world. Assuming that AI will port on AI is not about technology—it is about people, inevitably sideline humanity overlooks the very force and our ability to reinvent ourselves in the face of pro- driving its progress: us. AI’s capacity to automate found change. nonroutine tasks has stoked fears of human replace- ment—but this is only when we reduce people to mere task-performers. This Report challenges that view. It argues that humans, “the true wealth of nations,” are far more than the sum of the tasks we perform. Rather than measuring AI by how closely it mimics us, the Report emphasizes how the differences between humans and Achim Steiner machines can create powerful complementarities that Administrator expand human potential. United Nations Development Programme FOREWORD v Acknowledgements Every Human Development Report is a Ola Awad, Oliver Chinganya, Koen Decan- Biggeri, Enrica Chiappero-Martinetti, Fla- voyage of discovery, exploring how the cq, Shatakshee Dhongde, Patrick Gerland, vio Comim, Carlos Alberto Garzon, Ann human development approach helps navi- Aishath Hassan, Ivo Havinga, Richard Mitchell and Kathy Rosenblum at the gate pressing challenges and emerging Heys, Solomon Hsiang, Doho Latif Kane, Human Development & Capability Orga- opportunities. That navigation proved par- Steven Kapsos, Milorad Kovacevic, Jaya nization; Stefano Calcina, Valentina Caliri, ticularly challenging for this Report, given Krishnakumar, Christoph Lakner, Steve Giuseppe Diglio, Gerardo Filippo, Marina the rapidly changing context of artificial Macfeely, Silvia Montoya, Anu Peltola, Kodric, Fabio Marchetti, Bianca Mihalcea, intelligence (AI). AI continues to astonish Iñaki Permanyer, Andrew Rzepa, Michaela Marco Presenti and Andrea Sironi at Gen- every day. It engenders a mix of hype and Saisana, Claudia Sanmartin, Hany Torky erali; Jon Clifton, Kiki Papachristoforou hope, along with fear and trepidation. It is and Andrew Zolli. and Andrew Rzepa at Gallup; Suela Aksoy, attracting financial investment and human We are also thankful to colleagues who Nancy Hey and Ed Morrow at the Lloyd talent towards its continuing evolution, but provided data assistance to the Statistical Register Foundation; Antonio Corcoles, it is also becoming a source of geopoliti- Annex, specifically, Jenny Cresswell, Ad- Ismael Faro, Zaira Nazario and Kush cal tensions. There was really no roadmap olfo Gustavo Imhof, Vladimíra Kantorová, Varshney at IBM; David G. Blanchflower at helping us navigate what seemed like a Olivier Labé, Jong-Wha Lee, Stephan Dartmouth College and Alexander Bryson new and constantly moving AI frontier. A Lutter, Alasdair McWilliam, Eric Roland Me- from University College London; Beata technology that is in many ways just one treau, Oscar Milafu Onam, Damien Sass, Javorcik and Zoe Russo at the European more like many others that preceded it Leo Tornarolii and Yanhong Zhang. Bank for Reconstruction and Develop- also felt at times different, in its ability to Appreciation is also extended for all the ment; Nino Naderashvili and Charlie Zong simulate and replicate features that are data, written inputs and peer reviews at South-North Scholars; Juliana Alves so distinctively human. Therefore, this is a of the Report’s draft chapters, including Soares, Paul Anthony, Kimberley Blair Report that captures the spirit of a particu- those by PB Anand, Paul Anand, Joel An- Bolch, Nicholas Nam and Leslie J Yun lar moment in time, with much uncertainty derson, Uğur Aytaç, Klaus Bruhn Jensen, at the World Bank; Sabina Alkire at the about what might follow in terms of both Yi Bu, Leonardo Bursztyn, Miriam Car- Oxford Poverty and Human Development AI as a technology and its ultimate impact rera Manzano, Maria-Louise Clausen, Nick Initiative; Stijn Broecke at the Organisation on people’s lives. Joining in this journey of Couldry, Andrew Crabtree, Fabien Curto for Economic Co-operation and Develop- exploration are the many individuals and Millet, Christiaan De Neubourg, Virginia ment; Lucas Chanel at the World Inequal- organizations recognized here that con- Doellgast, Kevin Donovan, Pablo Egaña ity Lab; Ketan Patel at the Force for Good; tributed their expertise, wisdom and ex- del Sol, Frank Esser, Adam Fejerskov, Jonathan Richard Schwarz at the UK AI pectations, as well as doubts, about what Rana Gautam, Anne Marie Goetz, David Security Institute/Thomson Reuters; Phil- AI might mean for human development. Hammond, Benajmin Handel, Tomasz lip Howard and Sebastian Valenzuela at The Advisory Board, always a crucial Hollanek, Jeroen Hopster, Johannes Jae- the International Panel on the Information source of advice and guidance, was partic- ger, Rafael Jimenez Duran, Julia Karpati, Environment; José M. Tavares at the Nova ularly relevant this year and is recognized Marie Kolling, Anton Korinek, Seth Lazar, School of Business and Economics; and next to the Report team not to implicate Margauz Luflade, Michael Muthukrishna, Hannah Hess at the Climate Impact Lab. them in the findings but to show apprecia- Rose Mutiso, Kruakae Pothong, Stiene Our thanks are also extended to Olimpia tion for their fundamental contribution to Praet, Carina Prunkl, Mitsy Barriga Ramos, Dubini, Olivia Lempa and Richard Steinert the Report’s framing and analysis . Christoph Roth, Anna Salomons, Stefka at the Nova School of Business and Eco- Complementing the advice from the Schmid, Tobia Spampatti, Tara Thiagara- nomics working on the Capstone Project. Advisory Board, the Statistical Advi- jan, Luis Hernán Vargas, Manuela Veloso, Several consultations and seminars sory Panel provided guidance on several Juri Viehoff, Zi Wang, Åsa Wikforss, Kuan- with thematic and regional experts and nu- methodological and data aspects of the song Victor Zhuang and David Zuluaga merous informal consultations with many Report—particularly those related to cal- Martínez. individuals without a formal advisory role culating its human development metrics. We are especially thankful to our close were held in the process of preparing this We are grateful to all the panel members: collaborations with our partners: Mario year’s Report. We are grateful for input in vi HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 these consultations from Siri Aas Rustad, Treviranus, Chi-Chi Undie, Ott Velsberg, Fiona Bayat-Renoux, Yakup Beris, Robert Tayma Abdalhadi, Alexandra Abello Colak, Stefaan Verhulst, Anna Walch, Skyler Bernado, Benjamin Bertelsen, Jeremy Elena Abrusci, Adedji Adeniran, Fabrizio Wang, Zi Wang, Achim Wennmann, Olivia Boy, Susan Brown, Camilla Bruckner, Mi- Andreuzzi, Anatola Araba, Vesa Arponen, White, Isaac Wiafe, Kellee Wicker, Kebene chele Candotti, Yu Ping Chan, Gary Chew, Victoria Austin, Gifty Ayoka, Joon Baek, Wodajo, Wang Xiaolin, Wan Xiaoyan, Hojin Chung, Enrique Crespo, Pauline Maha Bahou, Onur Bakiner, Pallavi Bansal, Yang Xingli, Nobuo Yoshida, Zhou Yu-Ya, Deneufbourg, Roqaya Dhaif, Violante di Roxana Barrantes, Gustavo Béliz, Eliot Muhammad Zaman, Liang Zheng, Shen Canossa, Mirko Ebelshaeuser, Ahunna Bendinelli, Cynthia Bennett, Rahul Bhar- Zhou and Enrique Zuleta Puceiro. Further Eziakonwa, Almudena Fernandez, Kumiko gava, Nidal Bitar, Karl Blanchet, Joshua support was also extended by others too Fukagawa, Arvinn Gadgil, Victor Garrido, Blumenstock, Joanna Bryson, Romina Ca- numerous to mention here. Consultations Herte Gebretsadik, Raymond Gilpin, Kiri chia, Hailey Campbel, Maria Paz Canales, are listed at https://hdr.undp.org/towards Ginnerup, Carolina Given Sjölander, Carla Michele Candotti, Michela Carlana, Dante -hdr-2025. Gomez, Janil Greenaway, George Gray Castillo, Han Sheng Chia, Zhang Chunfei, Contributions, support and assistance Molina, El Hadji Fall, Joe Hooper, Caro- Paul Anthony Clare, Ranjini CR, Daniella from many colleagues across the UN fam- line Hopper-Box, Alexander Hradecky, Darlington, Erika Deserranno, Arkan El ily are gratefully acknowledged: the Vito Intini, Ghida Ismail, Giulia Jacovella, Seblani, Ethar Eltinay, Alberto Fernández International Telecommunication Union, Zulkarin Jahangir, Anne Juepner, Hurshid Gibaja, Elenore Fournier-Tombs, Victor including Jin Cui, Fredrik Ericsson, Thi- Kalandarov, Tomohiro Kawase, Antonin Galaz, Helani Galpaya, Daniela Garcia erry Geiger, Youlia Lozanova, Jose Luis Kenens, Sujin Kim, Sharon Kinsley, Yuna Villamil, Michael Gibson, Gabriel Gomes Cervera-Ferri, Rosie McDonald, Martin Koh, Adithya Kumar, Alexis Laffittan, Julie Couto, Piers Gooding, Andrea Guariso, Schaaper and Caroline Troein; the Inter- Lee, Regina Lio, Jennifer Louie, Linda Anita Gurumurthy, Jinhwa Ha, Jungpil national Labour Organization, including Maguire, Joan Manda, Michelle Muschett, Hahn, Hamza Hameed, Corinne Heck- Janine Berg, David Bescond, Ekkehard Debashis Nag, Steliana Nedera, Liwen mann, Catherine Holloway, Marie Hu- Ernst, Andrea Marinucci, Uma Rani, Olga Ng, Keyzom Ngodup, Shoko Noda, Camila meau, Ghislain Irakoze, Natalie Jabangwe, Streitska-Ilina and Dagmar Walter; the Olate, Robert Opp, Anna Ortubia, Hye-Jin Parminder Jeet Singh, Yu Jianjun, Priscilla Office of the High Commissioner of Hu- Park, Gayan Peiris, Isabella Rosso, Jelena Ege Johnson, Seong Hwan Ju, Ma Jun, man Rights, including Scott Campell, Ruzicic, Pratyasha Saha, Sebnem Sahin, Zubair Junjunia, Frederike Kaltheuner, Isabel Ebert, Peggy Hicks and Nathalie Turhan Saleh, Philip Schellekens, Anca Ozge Karadag, Mary Kawar, Harttgen Ken- Stadelmann; the United Nations Office for Stoica, Helin Su Aslan, Hyunjee Sung, neth, Jungwook Kim, Niki Kim, Taeho Kim, South-South Cooperation, including Za- Ludmila Tiganu, Riccardo Trobbiani, Ramiz Yoon Ko, Sengmeng Koo, Adithi Kumar, nofer Ismalebbe and Naveeda Nazir; the Uddin, Georges Van Montfort, Agi Veres, Nagesh Kumar, Protiva Kundu, Cheol Lee, United Nations Entity for Gender Equality Kanni Wignaraja, Lesley Wright, Qu Xinyi, Dong Hoon Lee, Hyun-kynung Lee, Em- and the Empowerment of Women, includ- Haoliang Xu, Shinobu Yamaguchi, Weijing manuel Letouze, Nicola Limodio, Björn-Ola ing Hélène Molinier and Raphaëlle Rafin; Ye, Vitali Zakhozhyi and Ivana Zivkovic. Linner, Sonia Livingstone, Yu Lu, Jean Luc the United Nations Educational, Scientific We were fortunate to have the support Mastaki, Ke Luoma, Luísa Franco Macha- and Cultural Organization, including Priya- of talented interns and fact checkers: Id- do, Anu Madgavkar, Izhar Mahjoub, Joan darshani Joshi, Iaroslava Kharkova, Irakli ris-Alaba Aderinto, Natalia Aguilar, Komla Manda, Jenifer Mankoff, Audrin Mathe, Khodeli, Karalyn Monteil, Claudia Roda Amega, Raiyan Arshad, James Chabin, Francesca Mazzi, Lena Menge, Saurabh and Prateek Sibal; the United Nations Uni- Andrea Davis, Jessica Karki, Danielle Mal- Mishra, Hélène Molinier, Nusrat Molla, versity, including Elenore Fournier-Tombs, lon, Chiara Marcoccia, Nazifa Rafa, Yu-Ya Amal Mowafy, Ava Nadir, Yushi Nagano, Tshilidzi Marwala, Serge Stinckwich and Rong, Laura Sanzarello and Xiqing Zhang. Daniel Naoujoks, Fabio Nascimbeni, Alain Shen Xiamomeng; the UN Secretary-Gen- The Human Development Report Office Ndayishimiye, Megan O’Neill, Toby Ord, eral’s Special Envoy for Digital and Emerg- (HDRO) also extends its sincere gratitude Gudrun Østby, Nikolas Ott, Nikhil Pahwa, ing Technologies’ Mehdi Snene; and the to the governments of Japan, the Republic Yuhun Park, Balaji Parthasarathy, Pratik United Nations Industrial Development of Korea and Portugal for their financial Patil, Laurel Patterson, Jason Pielemeier, Organization Regional Office, including contributions. Their ongoing support is very Fillippo Pierozzi, Carina Prinkl, Raphaëlle Shraddha Srikant. much appreciated and remains essential. Rafin, Rebeca Robboy, Yurii Romashko, Colleagues in at the United Nations We are grateful for the highly profes- Ilana Ron Levy, Asma Rouabhia, Satyaki Development Programme (UNDP) pro- sional work of our editors and layout artists Roy, Tiffany Saade, Dong-Pyoung Sheen, vided advice and input and organized at Communications Development Incorpo- Bahja Ali Shuriye, Rita Singh, Sebastian consultations. We are grateful to Tehmina rated—led by Bruce Ross-Larson, with Joe Smart, Sang Hyo Song, Tong Song, Paul Akhtar, Abdallah Al Dardari, Fabrizio An- Caponio, Meta de Coquereaumont, Mike Spiegel, Serge Stinckwich, Jaimee Stuart, dreuzzi, Iffat Anjum, Jacob Assa, Estefania Crumplar, Christopher Trott and Elaine Wil- Inkyoung Sun, Yash Tadimalla, Zhou Taid- Asturizaga, Marcos Athias Neto, Walid son. It was a communal experience learn- ong, Toshie Takahashi, Ma Tianyue, Jutta Badawi, Rodrigo Barraza, Iram Batool, ing together, especially with Bruce, about ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS vii how regular spoken language (natural up with options that centred artificial intel- has not only scrupulously preserved and language in the computer science jargon) ligence on the human and avoid clichés protected HDRO’s editorial independence is becoming a new interface to communi- of robots or digital circuits—and she suc- but has always been generous with his cate with computational machines, as well ceeded in creating beautiful images with time and wisdom. He has provided us with as how artificial intelligence can support the help of artificial intelligence that met guidance and, on more than one occa- the preparation of these reports. That this brief. sion, challenged us to be more and more experience extended to the collaboration Over several years now the Human ambitious, so that we could make a differ- with Therese Severinsen Marques and the Development Report owes a deep debt ence in advancing human development. team at Studio Mnemonic in preparing the of gratitude to UNDP Administrator We only hope to have been worthy of the cover and images in the Report. Therese Achim Steiner. This gratitude has ac- trust and confidence that he has depos- was given a difficult challenge—to come cumulated over the years because he ited in our team. Pedro Conceição Director Human Development Report Office viii HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Contents Foreword v Technical solutions are not enough: Biases in AI are deeply intertwined with social norms and societal inequalities 119 Acknowledgements vi Framing a narrative on AI to advance human development 121 Overview 2 Terms and concepts 12 CHAPTER 5 Power, influence and choice in the Algorithmic Age 136 CHAPTER 1 Algorithms shape social choices and power 139 Empowering people to make artificial intelligence work for human development 16 Who has the power? Divides and dependencies are evolving amid furious AI races 146 Examining the demand side of AI 17 Looking back — a digital transformation going from creator CHAPTER 6 to destroyer? 24 Reimagining choices: Towards artificial intelligence–augmented Attention is all you need — for tasks that AI may do well in the future 26 human development 162 Envisioning the human development opportunity of AI 34 Building a complementarity economy to expand development frontiers 164 Driving innovation with intent: Aligning socially and privately CHAPTER 2 valuable AI research 172 From tools to agents: Rewiring artificial intelligence to Investing in capabilities that count: Can AI enhance education and promote human development 46 health outcomes? 179 From doing what we do to choosing what we choose 47 The road ahead: AI’s promise to advance human development 185 Entering a brave new (digital) world 49 Embedding AI into our social fabric 54 Notes 201 AI-infused social networks: What happens when AI makes choices References 220 for, between and among us? 59 Preserving and expanding human agency across scales 62 BOXES 1.1 The many ways generative artificial intelligence differs from CHAPTER 3 classical programming 27 Artificial intelligence across life stages: Insights from a 1.2 The perils and affordances of artificial intelligence 30 people-centred perspective 66 S1.2.1 Human intelligence is not defined by that of a single human but Early childhood — too little, too much, too risky 69 of many: Could artificial intelligence get there? 42 School age — access, regulation and ownership 72 2.1 Artificial intelligence revolutionizing biomedicine 51 Adolescence— smartphones, AI- powered apps and mental 3.1 Artificial intelligence can violate children’s rights — or protect them 71 wellbeing, much ado about nothing? 75 3.2 Levelling the playing field for disadvantaged students 73 Semi- autonomous adulthood — with overlapping identities 79 3.3 Artificial intelligence on social media undermines agency and Older age— trained, empowered and healthier? 83 drives emotions — but only for some young people so far 77 Multistakeholder action for people- centred AI 86 3.4 Harmful friends without benefits 81 S3.1.1 Connected or disconnected? Exploring possible mechanisms CHAPTER 4 between smartphones and mental wellbeing 90 Framing narratives to reimagine artificial intelligence to 4.1 Going beyond access: Women’s disproportionate care advance human development 102 responsibilities drive their lower digital skills 116 Beyond techno- determinism: Technological change shapes and is 4.2 As technologies advance, so do new ways of perpetrating shaped by society 103 violence against women 118 AI’s potential for people with disabilities: Framing a more nuanced 5.1 Recommendations in digital platforms and human development: narrative to expand human development 105 Artificial intelligence as part of the problem, part of the solution? 142 Narratives about care technologies overlook the profoundly 5.2 The UN Global Digital Compact for addressing power human and relational nature of care 109 imbalances and fostering inclusive artificial intelligence 153 Narratives about gender digital divides paint an incomplete picture 113 5.3 More subtle manifestations of power emerge in artificial intelligence models’ behaviour 154 CONTENTS ix 5.4 The potential for artificial intelligence audit protocols 155 3.3 Excessive screen time in early childhood is related to changes in the brain structure— and to reduced language 6.1 Assessing artificial intelligence’s productivity effects 168 capacity and understanding 70 6.2 Smart systems, shared goals: The complementarity of artificial 3.4 Mathematics achievement in the United States did not decline intelligence and digital public infrastructure 170 after calculators became available in the classroom 74 6.3 Who’s the boss? The rise of algorithmic management in the 3.5 Pandemic- related stress is a complementary explanation for automobile manufacturing sector 173 adolescents’ mental illbeing 76 6.4 Bridging bytes and governments: Artificial intelligence 3.6 Multidimensionally poor people with little education lack access ecosystems through partnerships 178 to the internet 79 3.7 Disentangling autonomy, authenticity and agency in the digital space 80 FIGURES 3.8 Automated systems may cut costs but distress customers 82 O.1 About two- thirds of survey respondents in low, medium and high Human Development Index (HDI) countries expect to use 3.9 Very little internet use among older people 84 artificial intelligence in education, health and work within one year 3 3.10 Stark variance in internet use among older people across O.2 Global progress in human development is losing steam, with countries with different Human Development Index levels 85 the weakest and most vulnerable being left farther behind 4 3.11 Across world regions older people who use the internet are O.3 The post-2020 slowdown in human development progress less distressed than younger ones 86 affects every region of the world 5 3.12 Social, algorithmic and data- driven biases in older people’s O.4 People at each life stage use artificial intelligence (AI) for healthcare 87 different purposes 7 3.13 Harnessing artificial intelligence (AI) for human development— O.5 Young internet users are struggling— everywhere 8 invest, inform, include 87 O.6 Younger people expect to lose control over their lives due to S3.1.1 Declining wellbeing, rising despair among young people in the artificial intelligence (AI) less than older people do 9 United States 89 O.7 Across occupations and Human Development Index levels, S3.1.2 Increase in despair in the United States since 2010, especially respondents expect that artificial intelligence will both automate among women 90 and augment their work — with higher expectations of augmentation 10 S3.1.3 Young internet users are struggling everywhere 91 O.8 ChatGPT answers are culturally closer to those of humans in S3.1.4 The age at first smartphone ownership appears to matter for very high Human Development Index (HDI) countries 10 mental wellbeing 92 1.1 About two- thirds of survey respondents in low, medium and S3.2.1 Respondents who prefer to live in a world without the platform 94 high Human Development Index countries expect to use artificial intelligence (AI) in education, health and work within one year 18 S3.2.2 Consumer surplus across welfare measures 95 1.2 Low Human Development Index countries are being left further 4.1 People with disabilities also face inequalities in internet use 106 behind 19 4.2 Most patents for conventional assistive technology are filed in 1.3 Most survey respondents are confident that artificial intelligence just a handful of countries… 107 (AI) will make them more productive at work, and the more AI is 4.3 …as are most patents for emerging assistive technology 108 used, the higher the share of respondents reporting feeling confident 20 4.4 Older people expect to have less choice and control over 1.4 The majority of monthly ChatGPT web traffic came from middle- their lives as artificial intelligence technologies become more income countries by mid- 2023 24 integrated into daily life 111 1.5 With classical programming, machines can execute routine tasks 25 4.5 On average, only 35 percent of graduates in science, 1.6 The cost of computing declined by 12 orders of magnitude in technology, engineering and mathematics are women 114 the classical programming age 26 4.6 The share of graduates in science, technology, engineering and 1.7 Beyond the routine–nonroutine tasks dichotomy: What artificial mathematics who are women has changed little since 2010–2011 115 intelligence (AI) can automate depends on the stakes and on 5.1 The market structure of the artificial intelligence (AI) supply the range of potential implications 29 chain is concentrated 138 1.8 The lower the level of skill and experience, the more workers 5.2 Artificial intelligence transforming the way people retrieve benefit from artificial intelligence (AI) 32 information 140 S1.2.1 A human development interpretation of the evolution of 5.3 Recommender algorithms show how artificial intelligence is computational machines—more tasks helpful to humans with less effort 41 shaping social, economic and political processes 141 2.1 Sense of agency now and in an artificial intelligence (AI)– 5.4 Artificial intelligence (AI) outperforms human mediators in defined future 47 finding common ground 145 2.2 Simpler forms of artificial intelligence (AI) may more easily 5.5 The majority of today’s large- scale artificial intelligence models promote human agency, whereas AI with high agenticity can are developed by organizations based in the United States, have a broader range of more dramatic impacts 48 followed by China and the United Kingdom 150 2.3 Interactions between and among humans and artificial intelligence 55 5.6 Most global investment in artificial intelligence (AI) flowed to the 2.4 Cultural differences from the United States explain the use of ChatGPT 62 United States in 2024 150 3.1 People at each life stage use artificial intelligence (AI) with 5.7 Artificial intelligence (AI) talent has been flowing towards high- varying frequency and for different purposes 68 income countries 151 3.2 Invest, inform and include for people-c entred artificial intelligence (AI) 69 5.8 India has the highest self-r eported artificial intelligence (AI) skills penetration 151 x HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 5.9 The artificial intelligence (AI) race today can be conceptualized 4.3 Mobilizing big data artificial intelligence for localization: The as unfolding along a spectrum spanning innovation to arms 152 risks of reproducing unequal power hierarchies 130 6.1 Across Human Development Index (HDI) groups the largest share 5.1 Threats to democratic reason in a high-choice information of jobs exposed to artificial intelligence (AI) falls into “a big unknown” 165 environment 157 6.2 Men and people with greater levels of education report higher 6.1 The promise and peril of leveraging artificial intelligence to use of artificial intelligence (AI) for work—across all Human address dangerous planetary change 188 Development Index groups 166 6.2 Universal and meaningful connectivity and artificial intelligence 193 6.3 More respondents in low and medium Human Development 6.3 Global case studies of social dialogue on artificial intelligence Index (HDI) countries expect labour market changes—through and algorithmic management 195 augmentation, automation and productivity boosts—with artificial intelligence 166 TABLES 6.4 Across occupations and Human Development Index levels, respondents expect that artificial intelligence will both automate 1.1 Machine learning has extended the use of machines to many and augment their work — with higher expectations of augmentation 167 tasks that classical programming struggled with 23 6.5 Across occupations respondents expect transformational 2.1 Comparing characteristics of digital tools and artificial change to their work 168 intelligence (AI) agents 50 6.6 Disruptive science and technological innovation was on a S3.2.1 The CARE framework 99 steady decline through 2010 175 5.1 When do we confront high stakes? When “power over” is 6.7 Artificial intelligence can inspire humans to reach new heights in concentrated and impacts deeply or across many dimensions of creativity 175 people’s lives 139 6.8 Education—convergence in basic capabilities, divergence in 5.2 Gaps across country income groups based on popular artificial enhanced capabilities 179 intelligence (AI) metrics 149 6.9 Critical thinking mitigates students’ propensity towards extreme 5.3 Where there is a stronger case for international policy trust or distrust of online content 180 coordination on artificial intelligence 155 6.10 The benefits of digital resources for learning critical thinking diminish with excessive use 181 6.11 Mind the context—initial conditions can compound STATISTICAL ANNEX development challenges 185 Readers guide 269 S6.1.1 Computing performance has evolved at roughly the same pace as warming temperatures in recent decades 189 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT COMPOSITE INDICES SPOTLIGHTS 1 Human Development Index and its components 274 1.1 Humans have agency, algorithms do not 36 2 Human Development Index trends, 1990–2023 279 1.2 A human development perspective on the pursuit of artificial 3 Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index 283 general intelligence 39 4 Gender Development Index 288 3.1 The decline in young people’s mental wellbeing in some parts 5 Gender Inequality Index 293 of the world 88 6 Multidimensional Poverty Index: developing countries 298 3.2 The social media trap 94 7 Planetary pressures-adjusted Human Development Index 301 3.3 Worker agency in the digital age 97 4.1 Narratives in economic decisionmaking 125 Developing regions 306 4.2 Caring throgh digital platforms 127 Statistical references 307 CONTENTS xi OVERVIEW A matter of choice People and possibilities in the age of AI 1 OVERVIEW A matter of choice: People and possibilities in the age of AI 2 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Artificial intelligence (AI) has broken into a dizzy- a matter of human development and a means to ad- ing gallop. Each day seems to herald some new AI- vance it. The future is always up for grabs, even more powered algorithmic wonder. As a general- purpose so now. Trying to predict what will happen is self- technology, AI has been dubbed “the new electric- defeating, privileging technology in a make- believe ity.” Regardless of whether the utopian, techno- vacuum over the frictional realities and messier solutionist1 visions of AI’s most ardent advocates promises of people’s agency and their choices. From come to fruition or fizzle as snake oil (or worse), the a human development perspective the relevant ques- world is pulsing with a powerful new technology, a tion instead is what choices can be made so AI works new kind of dynamism or vitality, that differs from for people. technologies of the past. This year’s Human Development Report examines Yet, the AI zeitgeist is awfully blinkered. Headlines what distinguishes this new era of AI from previous fixate on arms races, policymaking on risks. These are digital transformations and what those differences real. But they are not— and should not be — the whole could mean for human development (chapter 1), in- story. We need to go beyond races and risks to possibili- cluding how AI can enhance or subvert human agen- ties for people, possibilities shaped by people’s choices. cy (chapter 2).2 People are already interacting with The choices that people have and can realize, with- AI in different ways at different stages of life, in ef- in ever expanding freedoms, are essential to human fect scoping out possibilities good and bad and un- development, whose goal is for people to live lives derscoring how context and choices can make all the they value and have reason to value. A world with difference (chapter 3). Human agency is the price AI is flush with choices the exercise of which is both when people buy into AI hype, which can exacerbate Figure O.1 About two- thirds of survey respondents in low, medium and high Human Development Index (HDI) countries expect to use artificial intelligence in education, health and work within one year Actual use of AI Expected use of AI HDI group in the past month in one year Expected increase in use Low and medium 14.4 66.1 High 23.6 68.9 Very high 19.0 45.9 0 20 40 60 80 Share of population (%) Note: Based on pooled data for 21 countries. For actual use in the past month, the following responses to the question, “In the past 30 days, have you ever interacted with artificial intelligence, such as chatbots, in any of the following ways?” were used to calculate the average use of AI for education, health and work: “education” is based on the response “educational platforms of learning apps,” “health” is based on the response “health care services or applications” and “work” is based on the response “work-r elated tools or software.” For expected use in one year, the following responses to the question, “Over the next 12 months, how likely are you to use an artificial intelligence tool for the following?” were used to calculate the average use of AI for education, health and work: “education” is based on the response “for education and training,” “health” is based on the response “for medical advice” and “work” is based on the response “for work tasks.” Expected increase in use is the difference between expected use in one year and actual use in the past month. Source: Human Development Report Office based on data from the United Nations Development Programme Survey on AI and Human Development. OVERVIEW — A MATTER OF CHOICE: PEOPLE AND POSSIBILITIES IN THE AGE OF AI 3 exclusion (chapter 4) and harm sustainability.3 And, HDI countries expect to use AI in education, health of course, who produces AI and for what matter a lot and work — the three HDI dimensions — within one for everyone (chapter 5). year (figure O.1). Letting people take the reins makes good sense, because they expect AI to be a growing part of their Human development gaps are lives. A global survey4 for this Report found that, at widening, and global progress all levels of the Human Development Index (HDI), may be losing steam AI use is already substantial (for about 20 percent of respondents) and is expected to shoot up fast. About Focusing on people can help many countries feel- two- thirds of respondents in low, medium and high ing caught in a human development pinch between Figure O.2 Global progress in human development is losing steam, with the weakest and most vulnerable being left farther behind Change in HDI value, 1990–2024 G lobal Human Development Index (HDI) value (excluding 2020–2022) 0.825 Threshold for very high 0.008 HDI group: 0.800 0.80 5 Pre-2020 trend 0.007 0.785 2021–2024 trend 0.006 0 .765 Mean change 0.74 5 2023–2024 0.005 (excluding 2020–2022) trend 0.725 0.004 ~4.5× lower 0.705 0.003 than the 1990–2024 mean change 0.685 0.002 (excluding 2020–2022) 0 .665 0.001 0.645 0.000 2000 2005 2010 2015 2 020 2 024 2030 (projected) 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2024 (extrapolated trend) (projected) Difference in HDI value between very high and low HDI countries 0.410 0.460 0.400 0.440 0.390 2016 2020 2024 (projected) 0.420 0.400 0.380 19921995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2024 Source: Human Development Report Office calculations based on data from Barro and Lee (2018), IMF (2024), UNDESA (2024c), UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024), United Nations Statistics Division (2025) and World Bank (2024d). 4 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 sky- high expectations for AI and sobering develop- Development pathways that have created jobs at ment realities, including ongoing violent conflicts and scale and reduced poverty, thanks to expanded man- stresses on human security. Wounds from the 2020– ufacturing and exports to international markets, are 2021 declines in global HDI value have not healed, narrowing.7 A triple squeeze results from inadequate and the rebound since may be losing steam. Just a few external financing, fewer opportunities in manufac- years ago we were on course to live in a very high HDI turing due in part to automation and trade tensions world by 2030.5 That world was delayed by a few years limiting export options.8 based on the 2021–2024 trend. Now it is projected to Now enter AI, a development wildcard.9 If AI is be delayed by decades (top left panel of figure O.2).6 seen simply as a supercharged extension of earlier While the global HDI value is projected to reach a digital technologies deployed to automate work, la- record high in 2024, the increase would be the low- bour is condemned to cede the remaining ground to est since records began 35 years ago (top right panel machines, further eroding development options. Is of figure O.2). Gaps between very high and low HDI this what is in the cards? countries, which for decades had been shrinking, have It is a matter of choices. Development depends less been widening over the past four years (bottom panel on what AI can do — not on how human it appears — of figure O.2). The dramatic slowdown in HDI pro- and more on mobilizing people’s imaginations to re- gress cuts across all developing regions (figure O.3). shape economies and societies to make the most of it. Figure O.3 The post-2020 slowdown in human development progress affects every region of the world Arab S tates East Asia and the Pacific Europe and Central Asia Regional Human Development Index value 0.750 0.850 0.900 Pre-2020 trend 0.850 0.800 0.700 0.800 0.750 0.750 0.700 0.650 0.700 0.650 0.650 0.600 0.600 0.600 1999 2007 2015 2023 1999 2007 2015 2023 1999 2007 2015 2023 Latin America and the Caribbean South Asia Sub-Saharan Africa 0.700 0.600 0.790 0.770 0.650 0.550 0.750 0.600 0.500 0.730 0.550 0.450 0.710 0.690 0.500 0.400 1999 2007 2015 2023 1999 2007 2015 2023 1999 2007 2015 2023 Source: Human Development Report Office calculations based on data from Barro and Lee (2018), IMF (2024), UNDESA (2024c), UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024), United Nations Statistics Division (2025) and World Bank (2024d). OVERVIEW — A MATTER OF CHOICE: PEOPLE AND POSSIBILITIES IN THE AGE OF AI 5 Making AI work for people It is time to break the spell of technological inevita- is a matter of choices bility: no path forward is about technology in isolation but rather how it is deployed — by whom, with whom, AI does some things uniquely well, such as seeing pat- for whom — and with what kind of accountability. Dif- terns in huge datasets that are difficult or impossible ferent choices can help turn things around, and the lens for humans to discern.10 It does other things poorly, of this year’s Human Development Report, focused on sometimes making things up.11 It cannot frame prob- people and possibilities, identifies three areas of action lems, as humans can do. Whatever new algorithmic for AI-a ugmented human development (chapter 6): feats are in store, there will always be spaces, howev- er in flux, where humans shine — where humans do 1. Building a complementarity economy, so people and things that machines cannot do or are bad at, where AI find more opportunities to collaborate rather societies value people rather than machines doing than compete. things and where people and machines go farther and Rather than try to predict the future, policym akers faster together than separately. should shape it, breaking away from trying to guess Evolving overlaps and complementarities between how humans will be replaced by AI, to see the poten- humans and AI- powered machines land societies at tial of what humans can do with AI. That includes inflection points, after which trajectories will depend driving productivity gains through intelligence aug- largely on two factors: what access societies have to mentation, leveraging the complementarities be- AI and how they view and use it. These are choices, tween AI and people. Ensuring that AI is proworker, by the few or the many. Is the focus on overlaps, pit- limiting curbs on agency and empowering workers to ting what Daron Acemoğlu calls so-s o AI against peo- use AI to augment what they can do. Deploying AI in ple, which could cut jobs without productivity gains?12 sectors where positive spillovers to other sectors and Or is it instead on complementarities and collabora- across the economy can be leveraged, helping with tion to envision new development pathways?13 Entire- economic diversification and job- creating structural ly new roles, markets and industries could be in the transformation. Implementing fiscal measures and offing. If anything, then, AI can be seen as adding strengthening social dialogue that incentivize AI to hazy pages to the development playbook instead of safeguard decent work and supporting incumbent stripping them away. Possible paths become wider, if workers displaced by AI. less clear, given that much is yet unknown about what AI can do and how it will affect human decisions. 2. Driving innovation with intent, so opportunity for people is not an afterthought but a built- in integral “ AI can be seen as adding hazy pages to the part of AI design and deployment. development playbook instead of stripping them AI should be harnessed to accelerate science away. Possible paths become wider, if less clear, through curiosity-driven basic research, as well given that much is yet unknown about what AI as technological innovation — not by automating can do and how it will affect human decisions creative processes but by augmenting them.17 AI innovation can be steered through incentives People seem to expect as much: a cloudy glass half that embed human agency in AI from design to full. Nearly 4 in 10 respondents14 in the survey for deployment — by aligning socially desirable and this Report expect AI to automate and augment jobs. privately profitable innovation and supplementing Overall expectations for augmentation (61 percent) existing AI benchmarks with new ones that capture just edge those for automation (51 percent).15 And the AI’s potential to advance human development. more that people use AI, the more confident they feel in its ability to increase productivity. Expectations 3. Investing in capabilities that count, so people have in developing countries are particularly high.16 With the capabilities to make the most of AI in their lives so much promise and expectation, the bar for AI is and to thrive in a world with AI. higher than simply being useful or “doing good”; it is AI’s flexibility and adaptability should be lev- avoiding development disappointment. eraged to personalize education and healthcare 6 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 in different contexts, while attending to risks and Figure O.4 People at each life stage use artificial concerns related to bias, privacy, affordability and intelligence (AI) for different purposes equity.18 By tailoring learning or expanding health care, AI can also generate demand for complemen- Purpose of AI use tary human labour.19 by occupation group Together, the three areas invite policymakers at dif- ferent levels to shake off unhelpful narratives that swing Work between utopia and dystopia, to depart from disem- powering trends that sideline most people or put bull- Education Student seyes on their backs and instead to embolden people to Entertainment reimagine their choices and expand their freedoms. Health Who, where, when and how? AI’s possibilities depend on context The possibilities of AI depend on context: who, where, when, how? AI is more than just an opportuni- Workforce ty for people’s choices; it requires them. People of dif- ferent ages use AI for different purposes (figure O.4). AI has shown promise for helping students by provid- ing study assistance when educators or parents have time or resource constraints20 or by improving per- sonalized, adaptive learning.21 AI could bridge gaps in the light of constrained education resources and help Nonworkforce level the field for disadvantaged students.22 This is in addition to — not in lieu of — teachers, who uniquely provide, among other things, necessary social inter- actions critical to students’ overall development. Until recently, one of the most well- established em- pirical regularities across countries was that subjec- tive measures of wellbeing (such as life satisfaction) Retired followed a U- shaped pattern with age: younger and older people reported higher wellbeing than those in middle age (late 40s to early 50s).23 About 10–15 years ago that began to change in some countries. Despair among young people shot up, and life satisfaction 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 tanked.24 Young women fare worse than young men.25 Share of survey respondents (%) What explains the dramatic declines among young people? The picture is complex and evolving. Note: Based on pooled data for 21 countries. For purpose of AI use, the follow- ing responses to the question, “In the past 30 days, have you ever interacted That the trend is most evident in some very high with artificial intelligence, such as chatbots, in any of the following ways?” were HDI countries and parallels the broader diffusion of used to calculate the average use of AI for work, education, entertainment and health: “work” is based on the response “work-r elated tools or software,” “ed- smartphones has implicated digital technologies. In ucation” is based on the response “educational platforms of learning apps,” a global survey of people with access to the internet, “entertainment” is based on the response “entertainment (e.g. streaming serv- ices/gaming)” and “health” is based on the response “health care services or the typical U- shape curve is completely absent. In its applications.” For occupation group the following responses to the question place is essentially a diagonal line, with young peo- “What best describes you? Are you…?” were used: “working” includes self- identified full- and part-t ime employees and self- employed respondents, and ple’s mental wellbeing at the bottom (figure O.5).26 “not working” includes homemakers and unemployed respondents. The opportunities for and risks to young peo- Source: Human Development Report Office based on data from the United Nations Development Programme Survey on AI and Human Development. ple from digital technologies, including AI, are OVERVIEW — A MATTER OF CHOICE: PEOPLE AND POSSIBILITIES IN THE AGE OF AI 7 Figure O.5 Young internet users are struggling — than technology alone. Social choices and contexts everywhere matter, too,29 including, at the most fundamental level, whether these applications are accessible and affordable. Likewise, gender inequalities permeate Average Mental Health Quotient score both the production and consumption of AI. The sur- 140 vey for this Report finds that irrespective of educa- tion qualifications, men are more likely than women 120 to use generative AI for work.30 100 Building a complementarity economy 80 60 Seemingly every day, a new AI model exceeds human scores on a narrowly defined benchmark, often bear- 40 ing apocalyptic sobriquets such as Humanity’s Last 20 Exam. From this supply-s ide view humans are framed as one- dimensional benchmarks in a zero-s um com- 0 18–24 25–34 35–44 45–54 55–64 65–74 75 and petition for finite spots in our future economy — an older economy of human replacement. Yet incorporating Age group (years) the demand side reveals how policy choices and North America Latin America strategies can promote a complementarity economy, Western Europe South Asia where AI could augment and extend existing human labour,31 yield a more inclusive labour market32 and Sub-Saharan Africa Oceania lead to new industries, jobs and tasks.33 Middle East and North Africa AI can automate tasks that have long remained Note: Data are from the Global Mind Project at Sapien Labs. The Mental Health resistant — nonroutine tasks that cannot be accom- Quotient score is a tool that encompasses 47 aspects of mental function as- plished by some industrial machine. Yet rarely do sessed on a life impact scale that span the dimensions of Mood & Outlook, the Social Self (or relational aspects), Adaptability & Resilience, Drive & Motiva- jobs comprise solely what can be readily delegated to tion, Cognition and Mind- Body Connection. The higher the score, the better machines. Consider radiologists, who were viewed a perceived mental wellbeing. The survey was conducted during 2020–2024. Source: Thiagarajan, Newson and Swaminathan 2025. decade ago as at risk of no longer being needed fol- lowing the success of AI in interpreting radiological particularly relevant for many lower HDI countries, imagery. Today, demand for radiologists remains as where age structures skew young and digital pene- high as ever.34 AI diagnosis is a far cry from deploy- tration has farther to go. That is itself an opportuni- ing medical knowledge in a clinical setting — which, ty to chart a path informed by lessons elsewhere. The even if it were feasible, patients might reject.35 A age structures of many higher HDI countries lean the decade on, the story of AI in radiology is one of other way, towards the old. Although patterns dif- complementarity — improving diagnostics through AI fer across countries, the world as a whole is greying that augments rather than replaces radiologists.36 quickly, with 1.4 billion people age 60 or older ex- AI’s capacity for augmenting human abilities can pected by 2030.27 At the same time younger people likewise serve as a vital onramp for economic inclu- expect to lose control over their lives due to AI less sion. For example, AI tends to improve the perfor- than older people do (figure O.6). mance of newly hired call centre workers but has AI has enabled pathbreaking innovations in as- lesser effects for seasoned veterans.37 Similar results sistive and accessible technologies that can expand have been documented in writing tasks,38 software choices and opportunities for people with disabili- development39 and management consultancy,40 ties, technologies such as live captioning, image de- among others.41 Firms are adopting AI for product in- scriptions and translation of sign language into voice novation more than for process automation and see- or text.28 But achieving the full reach and potential ing higher sales, revenue and employment through of these and other applications depends on more better outputs.42 8 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure O.6 Younger people expect to lose control over their lives due to artificial intelligence (AI) less than older people do Change (%) 10 5 0 15–24 25–34 35–44 45–59 60 and older High HDI –5 Low and medium HDI –10 –15 Very high HDI –20 Age group Note: Based on pooled data for 21 countries. Data show, for each age group, the change in perceived agency as measured by the difference in the percentage of respondents who feel they have a high level of control over their lives today and the percentage who expect to feel a high level of control five years from now, as AI becomes more integrated into everyday life. Source: Human Development Report Office based on data from the United Nations Development Programme Survey on AI and Human Development. As AI systems are integrated into jobs, working workforces today typically enjoy widespread access effectively alongside AI — understanding its limita- to digital devices and have extensive experience tions, interpreting its outputs and applying human using them.47 Elsewhere the persistent digital divide judgement — will be critical. New kinds of tasks and is likely to be a major barrier to realizing the positive related expertise will be needed at the nexus of peo- effects of AI on jobs and beyond.48 ple and machines. Some envision three new roles: ex- Looking ahead, people expect AI to both automate plainer, trainer and sustainer.43 and augment their work, but they expect the balance Yet AI can disrupt and displace work. Robust social to tilt towards augmentation (figure O.7). protection systems alongside adaptive skills building Whether the expectations for augmentation will be aligned with emerging needs can improve employ- met depends on policies and incentives to catalyse ment prospects,44 while on-t he-job training may sup- complementary between people and AI. Getting this port those whose jobs and tasks are reshaped by AI.45 wrong will lead to development disappointment in the AI systems rely heavily on human labour throughout short term and possibly wider economic divergence in the supply chain, from development and design to data the coming decades. One possibility is averting hasty labelling and annotation.46 As an AI- enabled economy worker replacement caused by deployment of so- so expands, social dialogue and collective bargaining are AI that destroys jobs without generating productivity key for new meaningful decent work opportunities. gains and instead promoting fiscal policies that en- Labour augmentation opportunities, despite their courage augmentation.49 big potential, are not inevitable. The digital divide persists, such that access and relevant skills are lim- Driving innovation with intent iting factors for using technology more broadly, and these challenges apply equally to AI in the workplace. AI can accelerate discovery and innovation and trig- Starting nearly a generation ago, digital technolo- ger new frontiers of creativity,50 potentially becom- gies began suffusing high- income countries, whose ing a method of invention.51 That is, a new tool to OVERVIEW — A MATTER OF CHOICE: PEOPLE AND POSSIBILITIES IN THE AGE OF AI 9 Figure O.7 Across occupations and Human Development risks leaving many countries and people behind.58 Index levels, respondents expect that artificial intelligence The mismatch between suppliers and users matters will both automate and augment their work — with higher for many reasons. One is cultural. AI models reflect expectations of augmentation the cultures where they were developed. ChatGPT responses are closer culturally to those of humans in very high HDI countries and most distant from those Expected automation (%) in low HDI countries (figure O.8). 100 Combatting cultural and linguistic bias is one reason many countries desire to be part of the AI supply chain. AI supply depends on three key inputs 80 — computing power, data and talent — some of which are highly concentrated, posing unique challenges to 60 many lower HDI countries. Only a handful of voic- es wield power over and through AI. Few of us have much direct say over it. What choices trickle down 40 to us may seem atomizing and binary: buy the latest gadget or not, accept the cookies or not. Take- it-or- leave-it terms of service agreements can boil down 20 to granting powerful firms carte blanche access to our daily lives or to being excluded from digital plat- 0 forms, where for better or worse ever more of our 0 2 0 4 0 60 80 100 lives, interactions and relationships take place. Expected augmentation (%) Note: Based on pooled data for 21 countries. Each dot represents the per- Figure O.8 ChatGPT answers are culturally closer to those centages of respondents in an occupation group in a country who expect au- of humans in very high Human Development Index (HDI) tomation and augmentation from AI to affect their occupation. The following occupational groups are used: professional/higher administrative, skilled, un- countries skilled/semi- skilled, services, clerical, farm and other. The shaded area repre- sents a higher share of respondents expecting augmentation than automation. Source: Human Development Report Office based on data from the United Nations Development Programme Survey on AI and Human Development. Correlation between ChatGPT answers and human responses empower people to fulfil the deeply human aspira- 0.90 tions to understand and create. Rather than auto- mating tasks in creative processes associated with 0.85 scientific and technological innovation, the key is 0.80 augmenting human intelligence52 by leveraging the complementary capabilities of AI and humans to ac- 0.75 celerate innovation53 and creativity more broadly.54 The direction of AI innovation could be steered in 0.70 ways that align with socially desirable and privately 0.65 profitable outcomes.55 AI benchmarks have become fundamental tools for evaluating the performance, 0.60 capabilities and safety of AI models.56 Supplement- Low Medium High Very high ing the current lot with new standards that assess AI’s HDI group contribution to human development could help steer AI innovation in that direction.57 Note: Higher values on the vertical axis indicate greater cultural and values similarity between ChatGPT and respondents in a given country (indicated The complex intersection of different country pri- by a dot). orities with global and local constellations of tech Source: Based on data from Atari and others (2025), who compared results across 65 countries from the World Values Survey. firms is fuelling a geopolitical innovation race that 10 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Narratives that focus on and reinforce only zero- us healthier, wealthier and more knowledgeable, while sum thinking crowd out opportunities where coop- shifting patterns of economic opportunity and redraw- eration could add a lot of value. At the global level ing inequalities.63 Not because of inherent features opportunities for international cooperation on AI of the technologies, but because of active decisions exist, not necessarily on everything but certainly in by people, firms and governments and the incentives some specific and important areas. The rationale is shaped by newly created institutions. As AI moves especially compelling in computer- provided over- from a niche technology to a cornerstone of people’s sight, content provenance and model evaluations.59 lives across multiple domains, its potential to advance Indeed, important work across many internation- human development has to be seized. That depends al institutions and fora are well under way. The UN on more than algorithms; it depends on our choices. Global Digital Compact, which encourages cross- The potential everywhere is big, including in lower jurisdiction and science- informed dialogue can ena- HDI countries, whose narrowing development path- ble countries to learn from each other and fine- tune ways feel more and more like a development tightrope regulatory approaches, as well as level the playing over a widening chasm. AI can act as a bridge — to other field so all countries can meaningfully participate in advanced technologies that can facilitate industrial up- and benefit from AI’s potential. grading,64 to greater diversification and integration up and down global value chains,65 to better markets for Investing in capabilities that count self- employed workers such as freight drivers66 and to new knowledge, skills and ideas that can help every- To prepare young people to strive with AI, education one, from farmers67 to small business owners.68 needs to focus on learning outcomes, as well as criti- Of course, that depends on access not just to “the cal, creative and relational thinking, moving beyond new electricity” — AI — but also to the old. Yet tapping simply increasing years of schooling. When integrat- AI’s potential goes well beyond access, however im- ing AI in education, avoid using AI as a crutch, by portant it may be. In a world of AI, divides will also teachers or students, and treat it as a companion to spin along another axis: which societies can make the unleash new ways of learning. This involves deploy- most of a game- changing technology, focusing on how ing AI to scale interventions known to enhance edu- AI complements and augments what people do, and cation outcomes, such as customized learning, rather which societies cannot, by either mistaking for it su- than deploying it for its own sake. percharged extensions of earlier computing technolo- In healthcare AI should be deployed to comple- gies or deploying it in ways that compete with people. ment expertise, particularly when it is scarce, as in lower- income countries and settings, empower- “ The future is in our hands. By building ing healthcare workers to do more in resource- and a complementarity economy, driving expertise-c onstrained contexts.60 Healthcare sys- innovation with intent and investing in tems and organizations should safely and trans- capabilities that count, societies can use AI to parently integrate AI technologies— strengthening expand people’s choices and possibilities. both institutional and frontline provider capacity to use these systems, while clearly communicating to The future is in our hands. Technology is about patients how the systems are employed in clinical people, not just things. Beneath the razzle- dazzle of decisionmaking to build trust. Because the unintend- invention lurk important choices, by the few or the ed side effects of AI in health services may change many, whose consequences will reverberate across over time, monitoring AI biases and health inequali- generations. By building a complementarity econo- ties needs to be seen as continuous.61 my, driving innovation with intent and investing in capabilities that count, societies can use AI to expand New horizons for human development people’s choices and possibilities. In doing so, new development pathways for all countries will dot the Scientific and technological progress propel develop- horizon, helping everyone have a shot at thriving in a ment.62 Waves of technological innovation have made world with AI. OVERVIEW — A MATTER OF CHOICE: PEOPLE AND POSSIBILITIES IN THE AGE OF AI 11 Terms and concepts Agency (human): People’s ability to hold values, set Computational machines: Devices that perform goals and make commitments that may, or may not, mathematical operations ranging from simple tabu- advance their wellbeing.1 lation and physical computation to advanced modern forms of AI. Agent (AI): An artificial intelligence (AI) system that can autonomously process information, makes deci- Computer vision: Techniques, ranging from clas- sions and complete tasks.2 sical computing to machine learning, for enabling computers to accomplish image-based tasks.11 Agenticity (AI): The degree to which an AI agent can autonomously and proactively execute tasks and act as Fine-tuning: Taking an existing model and provid- an agent (see above) over extended periods of time.3 ing additional training to adjust, extend or improve its performance.12 Algorithmic bias: Systematic errors in AI decisionmaking, often discussed in the context of er- Frontier models: Although not well defined, often rors that lead to inequitable outcomes, exacerbate dis- used to refer to cutting-edge, recently developed, ex- parities or reinforce existing patterns of discrimination.4 citing or particularly capable AI models.13 Algorithms: A specified process or set of steps that Generative artificial intelligence (including accomplishes a task, with roots in early mathematics large language models): AI specifically designed to but often used to describe sets of formal instructions generate information and content such as text, imag- provided to a computer.5 es, videos and protein structures.14 Alignment: The degree to which an AI system ex- Generative pretrained transformers: An ap- hibits consistency with human values, ethics and in- proach to developing AI that relies on a pretraining tended outcomes.6 step on large, unlabelled datasets (such as text from the internet) to train a family of models known as Artificial general intelligence: A catchall term for transformers. After the initial pretraining, the model hypothetical AI that exhibits intelligence that gener- is subsequently refined on labelled data.15 alizes across a wide range of contexts.7 However, defi- nitions, feasibility and coherence of the concept itself Hallucination: A term used to describe the possibility remain a subject of scientific debate.8 of AI generating false information, generating factual- ly correct outputs that are irrelevant to what the user is Artificial intelligence: Software developed to ac- asking for or generating statements that contradict each complish things typically associated with human other. In general, it refers to making statements without intelligence, from simple rules-based systems to regard to the truth.16 For example, AI may create a false modern generative AI and large language models.9 fact and trace it to a reference that does not exist. Benchmarks (AI): Quantitative assessments of AI (Human) intelligence augmentation: An approach to enable evaluation of its performance, efficiency, to developing or using AI that improves humans’ abili- capabilities, safety, bias, impacts and other features.10 ty to leverage their own cognitive capabilities.17 Chatbots: AI designed to have conversations, ranging Labelling: Detecting and tagging training data with from early approaches that relied on explicit rules to additional information to facilitate machine learning.18 more modern large language models and generative AI. 12 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Large language model: Forms of AI trained on very Reasoning or chain-of-thought (AI): A technique large datasets of human-generated text.19 for developing large reasoning models that, rather than simply generating output, are trained to gener- Machine learning: An approach to developing AI ate a series of intermediate steps between the task in which the system’s behaviour is not a result of ex- specification and final output. This approach im- plicit instructions but instead is learned from data or proves performance on some benchmark, but debate experience.20 lingers as to whether these systems are engaging in Model collapse: A phenomenon that occurs when true reasoning or merely mimicking or hallucinating AI is recursively trained on AI-generated data, even- the process of reasoning.24 tually resulting in degradation or outright failure of Reinforcement learning: A method of training in the model’s performance.21 which various decisions the system (here, AI) makes Multimodal (AI): Forms of AI that can process or are associated with different levels of reward. Learn- generate information across multiple modalities, ing is achieved by adjustments that enable larger re- such as audio, text and images.22 ward in subsequent steps. Neural networks: An approach to machine learning Retrieval augmented generation: A technique in which computers interact with networks of individ- for improving AI responses that enables it to re- ual units (neurons) that learn by altering their con- trieve information from elsewhere (such as the in- nections to one another over time.23 ternet or a dataset) in the process of generating its response. Open source, open data: Software (or perhaps data) for which the code is made publicly available under Small models: AI models that are smaller in terms a copyright licence that enables others to use, study of parameter counts or complexity, often cheaper to and change the code for any purpose. train, modify and use. Parameters: The variables that a machine learning Training data: Images, text, video or any other type AI model adjusts throughout the course of training. of data used for machine learning and AI. Prompt: Instructions provided to generative AI to Turing machine: An abstract model of a computa- shape or determine its output. tional system proposed by Alan Turing that applies rules to stored information such that it can imple- Prompt engineering: The process of developing ment any possible algorithm. more complex prompts that better enable AI to pro- duce a desired response. NOTES 1. UNDP 2024b. 13. Cottier and others 2024. 2. Mukherjee and Chang 2025. 14. Banh and Strobel 2023. 3. Mukherjee and Chang 2025. 15. Achiam and others 2023. 4. Kordzadeh and Ghasemaghaei 2022. 16. Hicks, Humphries and Slater 2024. 5. Chabert and Barbin 1999. 17. Jarrahi, Lutz and Newlands 2022. 6. Ji and others 2023. 18. Kotsiantis, Zaharakis and Pintelas 2006. 7. Goertzel 2014. 19. Naveed and others 2023. 8. Mitchell 2024a. 20. Jordan and Mitchell 2015. 9. McCarthy and others 2006. 21. Shumailov and others 2024. 10 Raji and others 2021. 22. Zhang and others 2020. 11. Ballard and Brown 1982. 23. McCulloch and Pitts 1943. 12. Ding and others 2023. 24. Mitchell 2025. OVERVIEW — A MATTER OF CHOICE: PEOPLE AND POSSIBILITIES IN THE AGE OF AI 13 CHAPTER 1 Empowering people to make artificial intelligence work for human development 15 CHAPTER 1 Empowering people to make artificial intelligence work for human development As artificial intelligence (AI) races ahead, this chapter turns the focus to people—not just to those who build AI but to how people everywhere can use it to improve their lives. This is the most relevant question from a human development perspective. Used in the right way, AI offers an opportunity to expand human capabilities. The chapter challenges unhelpful myths about AI replicating humans and calls for reimagining the relationship between people and this powerful new technology. Despite all the things that AI can do, it cannot replace human judgement. Thinking beyond replacing humans reveals opportunities for AI to augment human development and enhance the unique contributions of human intelligence, including expanding human scientific and expressive creativity. 16 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 “B oth the technologies developed and the improving productivity and increasing living stand- manner in which they are used — for exploitation ards has depended on complementary changes in the or emancipation, for broadening prosperity organization of economic activity, not simply replac- or concentrating wealth — are determined ing older technologies with newer ones. The chang- foremost not by the technologies themselves es in the organization of economic production during but by the incentives and institutions in the transition from steam power to electricity are a which they are created and deployed.” well-studied example that has been invoked to ex- —US National Academies of Sciences, plain the lag between the adoption of digital technol- Engineering and Medicine 2024, p. 84 ogies and productivity gains.10 Moreover, only a small fraction of the social value of innovation has been As artificial intelligence (AI) reaches ever more appropriated by the innovators.11 By one estimate stunning abilities, how will it shape our work, our re- digital entrepreneurs of the late 1990s appropriated lationships, our lives? With AI appearing to “reason,”1 only about 7 percent of the additional value created will it come after our jobs? Could artificial general by new digital firms in the United States alone.12 Ac- intelligence, the pursuit of which is one of humani- counting for the value of digital goods in 13 countries ty’s most ambitious technological endeavours, make added $2.5 trillion in consumer welfare (or 6 percent people worse off?2 Should we fear that something like of their combined GDP), with larger welfare gains artificial superintelligence might wipe out human accruing to lower income countries and individuals civilization?3 within countries.13 Rather than try to answer these questions by pre- Another reason is that people expect AI to be a dicting what will happen, this Report asks what choic- growing part of their lives. A global survey for this Re- es can make AI work for people. It proposes a human port found that AI use is already substantial for about development framework to see how AI differs from 20 percent of respondents at all Human Develop- previous digital technologies and to navigate the fu- ment Index (HDI) levels.14 But even more stunning, ture of this rapidly changing technology, wherever it at least two- thirds of respondents in low, medium may go.4 Instead of looking to the future through a and high HDI countries expect to use AI in education, foggy fear of the unknown, this chapter invites us to health and work — the three HDI dimensions — within shape that future by knowing more about what AI can one year (figure 1.1).15 and cannot do now and what might be possible as AI The chapter argues that AI represents a technolog- evolves.5 ical inflection point beyond simply having more pow- erful digital tools. AI invites new ways of exploring Examining the demand side of AI how economies at all income levels can harness its potential to advance human development.16 But the Much policy and media attention focuses on the task is particularly urgent for low- income and many supply side of AI — which firms and countries will middle- income countries, given that the pathways get ahead in the AI race6 and how to ensure that the that created jobs at scale and reduced poverty over production and deployment of AI are free from ac- the past two to three decades, based on expanding cidents, misuse or systemic negative social impacts7 manufacturing industries and exporting to interna- and grounded in human rights.8 Supplementing these tional markets, are narrowing.17 Low HDI countries crucial considerations, the main focus here is on the continue to diverge from very high HDI countries demand side of AI, its use across society, examining (figure 1.2), with many skipping the kinds of structur- how it can either enhance or subvert human agency al transformation that run through manufacturing, by (chapter 2),9 how it is already changing people at dif- having employment move straight from agriculture ferent life stages, often in harmful ways (chapter 3), to services rather than shifting to manufacturing in and how succumbing to AI hype can exacerbate ex- between.18 The narrowing of pathways for low- and clusion (chapter 4) . middle- income countries is related in part to the The key reason to consider the user side of AI is that automation bias of the ongoing digital transforma- historically the impact of technological innovation on tions, but AI offers new options if opportunities to CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 17 Figure 1.1 About two- thirds of survey respondents in low, medium and high Human Development Index countries expect to use artificial intelligence (AI) in education, health and work within one year Actual use of AI Expected use of AI HDI group in the past month in one year Expected increase in use Low and medium 14.4 66.1 High 23.6 68.9 Very high 19.0 45.9 0 20 40 60 80 Share of population (%) Note: Based on pooled data for 21 countries. For actual use in the past month, the following responses to the question, “In the past 30 days, have you ever interacted with artificial intelligence, such as chatbots, in any of the following ways?” were used to calculate the average use of AI for education, health and work: “education” is based on the response “educational platforms of learning apps,” “health” is based on the response “health care services or applications” and “work” is based on the response “work-r elated tools or software.” For expected use in one year, the following responses to the question, “Over the next 12 months, how likely are you to use an artificial intelligence tool for the following?” were used to calculate the average use of AI for education, health and work: “education” is based on the response “for education and training,” “health” is based on the response “for medical advice” and “work” is based on the response “for work tasks.” Expected increase in use is the difference between expected use in one year and actual use in the past month. Source: Human Development Report Office based on data from the United Nations Development Programme Survey on AI and Human Development. complement rather than replace work are explored.19 must avoid anthropomorphic generalizations that AI on its own is not a panacea.20 Its impact will de- could mislead people into thinking that AI can do pend ultimately on whether people, firms and gov- everything more capably.23 Some things are best ernments adjust and reorganize to make the most of left either to humans or to other pre- AI digital it. That includes accelerating the transition to low- tools.24 carbon economies and supporting the multiple trans- Comparisons of human and artificial intelligence formations historically associated with development are fraught with fear, uncertainty and false hope (from rural to urban, from home production to mar- (spotlight 1.1).25 Whether machines are close to ket, from informal to formal, from self- employment being humanlike (writing a poem) distracts from to wage work).21 identifying how to use AI to augment what humans The chapter’s three key messages: wish to do (helping with poetic expression).26 AI is better than any human at chess, but people still play • The value of AI for human development lies not in against each other — and are getting better at it with whether computational machines (machines, for AI.27 AI algorithms have increased music streaming, short) are intelligent but in the ways they can augment which has stimulated demand for live performanc- human intelligence.22 es.28 This suggests that the authenticity of human AI does some things very well, things that no connections and the need to identify with other hu- machine or human has ever done before. But one mans will remain important, even if machines can 18 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure 1.2 Low Human Development Index countries are clinical setting, where contextual awareness and being left further behind subjective human interactions are critical.38 Even if some automation takes hold, AI is also creating new tasks for people, given, for example, Difference in HDI value between very high and low HDI countries its potential to personalize services, as in med- 0.410 icine.39 AI’s wide availability makes advanced 0.460 expertise more accessible,40 and open- source AI 0.400 allows customizing AI to varied local contexts.41 Seeing AI as a new way for humans to take advan- 0.440 0.390 2016 2020 2024 tage of the knowledge others have accumulated (projected) over generations42 opens windows for people 0.420 anywhere to solve problems and pursue new ven- tures.43 At the same time it creates new challenges, ranging from intellectual property management44 0.400 and the compensation of creative workers that gen- erate content used to train AI models45 to concerns over privacy and human rights, which may be made 0.380 19921995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2024 vulnerable in new ways.46 Source: Human Development Report Office calculations based on data from • Despite the many ways AI is useful, its inability to bear Barro and Lee (2018), IMF (2024), UNDESA (2024c), UNESCO Institute for responsibility leaves it unable to fulfil many roles in Statistics (2024), United Nations Statistics Division (2025) and World Bank (2024d). society, creating further demand for AI- augmented human roles. surpass humans in some tasks.29 In fact, it has been AI can be very good at seeing data patterns that argued that the value of the real, the authentic, may are hard for humans to discern,47 but it is not an increase as AI is more widely deployed.30 oracle that can predict the future.48 In a courtroom even seemingly accurate AI tools for deciding who • Harnessing the human- augmenting power of AI to em- should receive bail cannot know whether a given power people requires questioning misleading narratives individual truly poses a flight risk.49 Assuming that that AI can replicate and replace human intelligence. AI knows that can lead to excessive deference to AI goes beyond what earlier digital tools can do. AI, risking ceding human agency (chapter 2).50 Pre- AI digital tools faithfully executed sequenc- Another key reason AI cannot replace humans es of steps to automate routines but struggled in many contexts is that it bears no responsibility with things such as recognizing a cat in an image, for its actions.51 Knowing that some decisions which AI can now do. As a result, the scope for affecting our lives are made by a real person who potential automation expanded.31 But focusing is accountable is an irreplaceable feature of so- on automation sells short the potential of humans cial arrangements — and one reason people react and machines alike.32 It can lead to deploying what against automated enforcement of government Daron Acemoğlu called so-s o AI33 for things people regulations.52 already do very well, with few if any productivity Thinking beyond replacing humans reveals op- benefits34 but with job losses35 and other downsides portunities for AI to augment the unique contribu- of AI, including exploitative labour practices in tions of human intelligence, including expanding data labelling36 and environmentally stressing en- human scientific and expressive creativity. Human ergy and material requirements.37 evaluation of AI outputs is often required, particu- More generally, focusing exclusively on automa- larly in high- stakes situations, further expanding tion ignores humans’ complex multifaceted roles. the scope of AI augmentation. For example, in legal Passing a medical test, which AI can now do, is far and medical applications, given that AI can hallu- different from applying medical knowledge in a cinate (including by producing plausible sounding CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 19 but factually wrong statements or generating out in the short term, on what new tasks are created statements that contradict each other).53 Moreover, on longer time scales and on how demand for more having humans interact with AI using regular spo- efficiently produced goods and services evolves — all ken language may introduce ambiguity in what uncertain but the result of deliberate policy, firm and people are trying to achieve.54 What is high stakes individual choices.55 The role of choices represents (elaborated in chapter 5) is a matter of individual opportunities to make AI work for people. This is par- and social choice, so there is much scope to expand ticularly important because most survey respondents AI augmentation as a result of the need for human are confident that AI will make them more productive evaluation of AI outputs in many situations. at work, and this confidence increases as AI use rises In sum, both humans and AI are sold short by no- (figure 1.3). tions of replacing humans simply because AI can automate some tasks. Instead, AI’s potential is best leveraged to augment human strengths, such as intel- An alien intelligence is becoming part of our lives ligence and agency. Automation and augmentation are twin features of the relationship between humans The novel capabilities of AI — particularly generative and AI that will determine AI’s impact on human de- AI, which showcases remarkable advances in content velopment. In the world of work, the net effect on em- generation and creative tasks — require recognizing ployment will depend on how the two forces balance that something new has entered people’s lives. That Figure 1.3 Most survey respondents are confident that artificial intelligence (AI) will make them more productive at work, and the more AI is used, the higher the share of respondents reporting feeling confident Share of population that is confident that AI will increase their work productivity (%) 80 70 60 Age group 50 15–24 25–34 35–44 45–59 60 and older 40 0 20 40 60 80 100 Index of use of AI for Human Development (last month) Note: Based on pooled data for 21 countries. For actual use in the past month, the following responses to the question, “In the past 30 days, have you ever in- teracted with artificial intelligence, such as chatbots, in any of the following ways?” were used to calculate the average use of AI for education, health and work: “education” is based on the response “educational platforms of learning apps,” “health” is based on the response “health care services or applications” and “work” is based on the response “work-r elated tools or software.” Confidence that AI will increase productivity is based on respondents who answered “likely” or “very likely” to the question, “You believe ‘AI will increase your productivity at work.’” Source: Human Development Report Office based on data from the United Nations Development Programme Survey on AI and Human Development. 20 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 something is raising fresh questions because so much feel adrift in the possibilities. Yet Sejnowski firm- about it is unknown — and perhaps unknowable. Neu- ly anchors us: large language models, and AI more roscientist Terrence Sejnowski described the appear- broadly, are not human, not even living organisms ance of large language models such as ChatGPT, a (spotlight 1.1). From a human development perspec- kind of generative AI,56 in this way: tive choices should be guided by how to combine uniquely human characteristics with AI’s unique A threshold was reached, as if a space alien sudden- complementary abilities. This will not be effortless. ly appeared that could communicate with us in an Building and maintaining an augmentative relation- eerily human way. Only one thing is clear — LLMs ship with AI are hard.66 Augmentative relationships [large language models] are not human.... Some require moving beyond easy applications that lev- aspects of their behaviour appear to be intelligent, erage AI as a crutch, undermining human intellect but if not human intelligence, what is the nature of rather than augmenting it.67 The rest of this chapter their intelligence?57 explores how to do this. In the near future, and perhaps forever, we will have to grapple with Sejnowski’s question. Scientists, AI is better at helping people than replacing them philosophers and people in general continue to de- bate whether AI is approaching, or has even already The vocabulary around AI often misleads — starting achieved, some degree of human understanding.58 In with the term “intelligence.” While useful for de- Sejnowski’s framing it seems only right to mix con- scribing AI abilities, intelligence should not imply cern and optimism for sharing the planet with arte- that machines are acquiring human traits.68 AI is facts that exhibit intelligence once squarely in our not able to frame problems or act on its own behalf purview. How will AI change us as individuals? As so- (spotlight 1.1). Because AI can do some things so well, cieties and cultures? As a planet? some people assume that humans will not be needed to do those things. It was predicted in 2016 that with- “ There are many opportunities for AI to advance in a decade advances in AI medical imaging would innovation and creativity and many options to lead to the disappearance of radiologists.69 Extrap- explore new complementarities between AI and olations along the same lines continue to posit that humans without having machines replace humans artificial general intelligence will leave no work for people.70 There are many opportunities for AI to advance innovation and creativity and many options to ex- AI deployment need not replace humans plore new complementarities between AI and hu- mans without having machines replace humans.59 AI A decade later the prediction about radiologists has has the potential to generate demand for new exper- been proven wrong.71 By contrast, demand for radi- tise and new tasks.60 But using AI may imply difficult ologists is growing, with a global shortage at the time tradeoffs.61 For example, how much does society gain of writing.72 Using AI in a task (reading and classify- from improved scientific output from individual sci- ing medical images) did not mean that AI replaced entists using AI compared with the potential loss of radiologists for many reasons, three of which merit variation across these outputs?62 What moral and eth- close consideration.73 First, even though AI could exe- ical frames do we need to consider if machines can cute one task of radiologists, it was useless for several act as moral proxies?63 The interactions between AI others, including those that are inherently social and and humans will play out differently in different cul- require interacting with people74 and those that are tural contexts,64 but large language model responses constrained by the institutional and organizational converge towards particular cultural frames, often features of radiologists’ work context.75 Second, in- those first and fastest across the digital divide.65 troducing AI to help read medical images created Amid the myriad ways AI might affect our world tasks that did not exist before, requiring new skills — mundane, absurd or extreme — it can be easy to such as the ability to understand and interpret the CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 21 recommendations from AI.76 So, using a machine level appears to come more from greater product inno- to execute a task can replace but also create tasks.77 vation than lower production costs.86 Perhaps that is Third, having AI classify medical images liberated why a recent survey found that about a quarter of US radiologists’ time to devote more attention to other firms using AI did so in part to replace worker tasks but tasks, making them more efficient and effective.78 AI two-t hirds were not pursuing task replacement.87 not only failed to replace radiologists; it also failed to However, firms might still deploy AI to reduce op- reduce the value of their work.79 In the future AI may erating costs, including labour costs, particularly if replace tasks and even occupations — digital technolo- prevailing narratives focus on the better-t han-human gies have reshaped the world of work by doing exact- abilities of AI and if AI- producing firms emphasize ly that, and automation tends to reduce employment the benefits of replacing people.88 Seizing on AI’s po- and wages for incumbent workers even when the tential to augment rather than replace people will not economy as a whole is better off, as we will see later.80 be automatic.89 It will require deliberate choices to re- shape incentives and provide information on what AI Who gets to decide how AI is deployed? can and cannot do. AI technical affordances alone do not determine wheth- er AI will be deployed; there must be an organizational We are on a road to nowhere; come on inside: reason as well — and for firms, a business reason. For Taking that ride to intelligence augmentation example, a recent study found that while 36 percent of US private sector jobs were exposed to automation The case of AI and radiologists shows that AI has through AI advances in computer vision capabilities, reduced the human effort needed to get a machine the economic case made sense for only 8 percent.81 But to execute a task. At the same time the underlying new forms of generative AI are much more accessible AI that enhances medical image reading has many and provide greater opportunities for use in a more de- other applications, such as recording of vehicle li- centralized way. For example, even though only 18 per- cense plates and automation of industrial and agri- cent of US school districts provide any guidance on AI, cultural processes. AI expands the range of tasks that 60 percent of principals and 40 percent of teachers machines can execute. This borrows from Arvind used AI in the 2023/2024 school year.82 Among work- Narayanan and Sayash Kapoor’s ladder of general- ers in 27 countries, almost half used AI every day in ity, a description of the evolution of computational 2024, up from about 30 percent in 2023.83AI could thus machines as the pursuit of machines that can execute be accessible to the many self- employed workers in an ever- wider range of tasks (their generality) with low- and middle- income countries.84 less and less human input, direction or intervention (human effort).90 But where are we now? And what “ The ladder of generality describes the evolution comes next in the evolution of computational ma- of computational machines as the pursuit of chines? We briefly describe four stages, each marked machines that can execute an ever- wider range of by higher generality and lower human effort than the tasks (their generality) with less and less human preceding one (spotlight 1.2): input, direction or intervention (human effort) 1. Machines with hardware designed for one task While workers may now have more agency in using (such as digital cameras) generative AI, firms seeking to increase revenue and • Each task requires separate hardware. decrease costs will play a central role in how AI is de- • Low generality (machine designed for one task ployed. Deploying technological innovation to reduce only) and high human effort (build and operate labour costs tends to worsen wages and employment hardware for each task). for incumbent workers, even when overall employ- ment and labour productivity rise.85 AI can be de- 2. General-purpose hardware (classical programming)91 ployed to automate tasks, much like previous digital • One general- purpose computer can handle mul- technologies, but the economic impact of AI at the firm tiple tasks thanks to software. 22 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 • Generality increases substantially but still re- the first stage: computational devices built with spe- quires writing explicit instructions for each task cific hardware from scratch to execute a single task. or domain of tasks; human effort to have the Generality is low, and the corresponding human ef- machine execute tasks is reduced to the need to fort to automate a given task high, because hardware operate the software. needs to be built for each task. Such hardware is still with us — digital cameras, automated teller machines, 3. Machine learning (pre–generative AI) many medical devices and internet switches. • Instead of coding tasks in full detail, feed the Today’s programmable computers, in which a com- machine data from which it can learn a task, or puter (one piece of hardware) can be preprogrammed let the machine learn from known rules by inter- to execute many different tasks, correspond to classi- acting with itself. cal programming, the second stage (spotlight 1.2).95 • Generality expands further to tasks that are This vastly increased the generality of tasks that a hard to specify with instructions; human effort machine can execute and reduced the human effort declines because of the greatly reduced need to required to do so. operate software. With AI the nature of effort to offload tasks to a ma- chine has changed yet again, reaching a third stage, 4. Generative AI extending generality further to tasks difficult for clas- • Leverages large datasets spanning text, video, sical programming to execute. Rather than relying on images and sound. written code, systems learn their functionality from a • Generality is so broad that it spans drafting texts, corpus of data (think of data as examples that train the writing computer code, composing music and machine): this is the basic idea of machine learning, translating languages; human effort is lower be- which has yielded multiple applications (table 1.1). cause minimal user direction using regular writ- The most recent stage is the availability of large ten or spoken language is required for the task to language models and other forms of generative AI.96 be executed.92 AI already pervaded human lives before this fourth Humans have long imagined computational ma- stage but worked mostly invisibly in the background, chines. Talos, an automated guardian robot was ide- deployed by governments and firms.97 Generative AI alized in Greek mythology more than 2,500 years brought it to any person in the world with a comput- ago.93 We began to bring such science fictions to er or smartphone and internet access.98 Work use of life at the dawn of the electric age in the 19th cen- generative AI is spreading far faster than the use of tury, enabling automation of once uniquely human computers or the internet.99 Just after its release at information- processing tasks by constructing com- the end of 2022, more than 90 percent of web traffic putational machines, such as the Hollerith tabula- through ChatGPT came from high- income countries, tion machine that helped process the 1890 US census but within a few months the majority was coming (spotlight 1.2).94 That machine was characteristic of from middle- income countries (figure 1.4). Table 1.1 Machine learning has extended the use of machines to many tasks that classical programming struggled with Objective Why hard for classical programming Training data Practical applications Image classifiers Easy for people to recognize a chair, Images and labels Radiology, recording of vehicle very hard to specify with instructions license plates, automation of what it is industrial and agricultural processes Recommendations in Very hard to flexibly accommodate User behaviour on the digital Social media, streaming services, digital platforms diverse and changing interests with fixed platform internet searches, targeted instructions advertising Financial fraud detection Hard to specify all possible Financial transaction records Credit card platforms, banking characteristics of perpetrators or fraud services modalities Source: Human Development Report Office. CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 23 Figure 1.4 The majority of monthly ChatGPT web traffic augmentation.102 Navigating this ride, today and came from middle-i ncome countries by mid- 2023 going forward, implies appreciating how AI differs from classical programming, starting with how classi- cal programming drove the digital transformation of 100 the past, before envisioning ways AI can be leveraged 90 to advance human development in the future. 80 70 Looking back — a digital transformation 60 going from creator to destroyer? 50 40 Classical programming and AI are sometimes de- 30 scribed as simply an evolution towards machines be- coming more humanlike. 20 But classical programming and AI are better seen 10 as having different strengths and weaknesses. A 0 2023m1 2023m4 2023m7 2023m10 2024m1 sharp demarcation is hard to define, but it is still use- ful to examine key differences. Hopes and fears that High-income countries AI will simply supercharge the automation of classi- Upper-middle-income countries Lower-middle-income countries cal programming fail to consider some AI character- Low-income countries istics that may constrain automation. Conversely, tasks beyond the reach of classical programming may Source: Liu and Wang 2024. now be ripe for automation with AI. Appreciating these differences is key to having agency to shape the direction and application of AI in ways that advance The range of tasks that generative AI can execute human development. has even greater generality than earlier iterations of In classical programming explicit and rule- based machine learning. And the human effort to get the instructions are loaded on hardware to enable ma- machine to execute a task is very low, since it can be chines to execute tasks predictably.103 Classical pro- specified using regular spoken or written language. gramming machines execute tasks described as The discussion of AI in the rest of the chapter consid- sequences of precise and replicable steps specifiable ers primarily the affordances enabled by this fourth fully in advance. Economists classify these tasks as stage in the evolution of computational machines. routine.104 In classical programming much of the past Discussions of artificial general intelligence often half century has focused on discerning the routine obscure whether, where and when humans could tasks that could be done by machines — both manual benefit from whatever comes next.100 The ultimate and cognitive (figure 1.5). destination is not an inevitability simply because The automation of many routine tasks has reshaped we have come so far but a human choice, possibly the world of work,105 as with robots in manufactur- bounded by what is socially valuable only if execut- ing,106 often hurting incumbent workers’ employment ed by humans or reserved for human interaction (cer- and wages.107 Some occupations with purely automat- tain forms of art, high- stakes decisions).101 able tasks have disappeared, but that is rare.108 This framework helps in interpreting future AI The digital transformation that has unfolded since developments as the continuation of the pursuit of the advent of classical programming around the mid- greater generality with less human effort From a dle of the 20th century has been driven in part by human development perspective what matters are the steady decline in the cost of computing, which the choices shaping the direction of technological fell by 12 orders of magnitude (equivalent to going innovations and their applications in ways that aug- from taking a century to execute a task to taking less ment human capabilities and agency: if anything, than a second) between the middle of the 20th cen- a ride towards open- ended human intelligence tury and the dawn of deep learning in the late 2000s 24 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure 1.5 With classical programming, machines can countries in which the digital transformation pro- execute routine tasks gressed rapidly. But since the late 1980s task dis- placement has happened at a higher rate than task reinstatement in some of these countries.114 The impact of automating routine tasks extend- ed to low- and middle- income countries.115 In most countries occupations intensive in nonroutine tasks DOCTORS, have gained more employment since 2006 than oc- LAWYERS cupations intensive in routine tasks, regardless of SEQUENCES OF income level or economic structure, pointing to the PRECISE AND global impact of the digital transformation in auto- REPLICABLE STEPS THAT CAN mating routine- intensive work.116 There are multiple BE SPECIFIED FULLY IN channels through which this happened. Automation ADVANCE in high- income countries became a substitute for globalization, in that firms based in these coun- PLUMBERS, ELECTRICIANS tries had lower incentives to seek less expensive la- bour in lower income countries.117 Integration into global value chains by firms in low- and middle- income countries increasingly required capital- and technology- intensive machinery (such as computer- aided manufacturing and industrial robots) to remain globally competitive, resulting in what economist Dani Rodrik called jobless industrialization.118 This shift in labour shares from routine to (figure 1.6). The massive reduction in cost has provid- nonroutine tasks further disadvantaged many low- ed strong incentives to use more and more classical and middle- income countries because it increased programming machines for more and more routine the value of advanced expertise, which is required tasks.109 for many nonroutine cognitive and interperson- The digital transformation enabled by classical al tasks119 and is scarcer in lower income countries programming changed the world of work, creating than in higher income ones.120 Advanced expertise many new tasks, occupations, firms and even whole is not widely available because it typically requires industries, as with software development, includ- apprenticeships or formal higher- level education.121 ing software engineers and developers. India alone In high- income countries and some middle- income employs more than 5 million software developers, countries a bias against unskilled work contributed to roughly the population of Ireland, with demand ex- wage polarization,122 with gains for those at the very pected to continue to grow.110 In the United States bottom and very top of the earnings distribution but 60 percent of employment in 2020 was concentrat- a hollowing- out of the middle.123 This reflects the de- ed in occupations that did not exist 80 years earlier,111 cline in the economic value of expertise needed for and more than 85 percent of this employment growth occupations such as factory and office workers, situ- was driven by technology-r elated new tasks (the Digi- ated in the middle of the wage distribution.124 Shifting tal Revolution was a major part).112 from occupations intensive in routine tasks to occu- At the same time occupations with many routine pation intensive in nonroutine tasks has a geograph- tasks eventually had machines deployed to execute ic element because the places with opportunities and more and more of the tasks, depressing demand for the places with obsolescence rarely coincide, pre- those occupations.113 For the first 40 or so years since cluding reskilling.125 The way skills are acquired may the advent of classical programming, the rate of task make those acquired in routine tasks largely irrele- displacement due to task automation was roughly vant to nonroutine tasks. Reskilling from the ground the same as the rate of task creation in high- income up is not easy.126 CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 25 EVITINGOC LAUNAM ROUTINE NONROUTINE Note: The red oval represents tasks that classical programming can automate. Source: Human Development Report Office. Figure 1.6 The cost of computing declined by 12 orders of magnitude in the classical programming age Price per unit of computing power (2006 $) 1.E+04 Manual Burroughs 9 1.E+03 1.E+02 Abacus 1.E+01 (novice) 1.E+00 Thomas 1.E–01 arithmometer EDSAC 1.E–02 1.E–03 IBM 360 1.E–04 1.E–05 IBM PC 1.E–06 1.E–07 Dell XPS 1.E–08 1.E–09 1.E–10 Dell PW380 1.E–11 1850 1870 1890 1910 1930 1950 1970 1990 2010 PRE-TURING MACHINES TURING MACHINES Source: Nordhaus 2007. The digital transformation unleashed by classi- to supplement the frame of analysis of routine versus cal programming did not determine the rates of task nonroutine tasks with new elements associated with displacement and reinstatement on its own, even if the distinct characteristics of AI that offer new oppor- economic incentives for automating tasks are strong: tunities to envision a more augmentative relationship institutions and policies had a crucial role.127 The with human development. digital transformation and the choices made on its direction and deployment redefined the skills and Attention is all you need — for tasks expertise that command higher wages, contributing that AI may do well in the future to a decline in the economic value of the low- level expertise of factory and office workers and an in- One of the key strengths of classical programming crease in the economic value of advanced expertise is the ability to master and execute routine tasks. for nonroutine cognitive and interpersonal tasks and In contrast, AI can master and execute nonroutine for nonroutine manual tasks. So, while the digital tasks, including things that people know only tacitly transformation had many positive impacts, its bias without following explicit rules.128 This opens the pos- towards automation has also created challenges. If AI sibility of automating more tasks currently out of the is seen only as more of the same automation that we reach of classical programming, particularly with the saw with the digital transformation, there would be advent of generative AI (box 1.1).129 little reason to expect different outcomes going for- If the impact of AI simply followed the path of clas- ward. However, understanding how AI differs from sical programming in automating routine tasks, occu- classical programming suggests that it is important pations exposed to one would also be exposed to the 26 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Box 1.1 The many ways generative artificial intelligence differs from classical programming Generative AI differs from classical programming in many subtle ways. Outputs in classical programming follow from instruction to the machine in a sequence of specific and fully certain actions that lead the machine to always produce the same output given the same inputs (deterministic outputs). But with generative artificial intelligence (AI), for each input the machine probabilistically predicts an output that is based on its training data and what its algorithm was optimized to do and that cannot be known in advance with full certainty in most current generative AI applications (stochastic outputs).1 Using the same prompt to a large language model will not always generate the same output.2 Making the most out of tasks performed by a large language model depends on the prompt— with, as a result, prompt engineering emerg- ing as a new task for humans.3 Other approaches supplement prompt engineering, such as retrieval- augmented generation (in which external knowledge — retrieved through a web search engine, for instance — helps the model generate more accurate and reliable responses).4 Or chain- of-thought prompting, which instructs large language models to “think” step-b y-step.5 But even if these approaches improve large language model performance in some tasks, they also reduce it in others.6 Generative AI often hallucinates (yielding plausible sounding but factually wrong outputs, contradictory statements or factually correct but irrelevant statements).7 Generative AI outputs do not emanate from causal sequencing based on things such as basic logic8 and so often fail to give correct answers to slightly changed prompts.9 Large language models also struggle with simple tasks such as counting words or reversing a list.10 Models often lack awareness of their limitations11 and, more worryingly, express overconfidence in their abilities.12 It is difficult to understand how generative AI generates its outputs, whether truthful or not.13 Generative AI lacks knowledge recency beyond its training data, so it may struggle with tasks that require updated information.14 One obvious solution is to update the data and retrain the model, but that gives rise to another chal- lenge: catastrophic forgetting. Since AI does not retain memory when it is trained on new data or for a new task, that creates challenges.15 There are many efforts to address these limitations,16 and there has been tremendous progress since early itera- tions of generative AI.17 Some involve enabling large language models to invoke other tools to improve their outputs (such as a calculator for arithmetic tasks or a web search engine to access more recent information beyond their train- ing data).18 Other approaches imply “editing” the models through different mechanisms.19 But it might not be possible to eliminate limitations entirely,20 particularly given current algorithmic architectures and approaches, because these models have no representation of ground truths against which they can assess the veracity of outputs.21 At the time of writing, the hallucination rate of the most advanced large language model released by OpenAI, GPT- 4.5, was 37 per- cent, down from the 60 percent of its predecessor (GPT-4 o) — great progress, but far from eliminating hallucinations.22 Notes 1. Banh and Strobel (2023) focus on generative AI. Some challenges relate more broadly to machine learning, which often reflects “shortcut learning,” where the model identifies spurious correlations in the data that allow it to perform well on some benchmarks without understanding why it does so (Geirhos and others 2020). 2. Minaee and others 2024; Santu and Feng 2023. 3. Cao and others 2024; Polverini and Gregorcic 2024; White and others 2023. Beurer-K ellner, Fischer and Vechev (2023) suggest that prompting is programming. 4. For a combination of retrieval-a ugmented generation and in-c ontext learning to integrate diverse cultural knowledge in large language model outputs, see Seo, Yuan and Bu (2025). 5. Liu and others 2024b. This can elicit reasoning in large language models (Wei and others 2022). 6. J. Chen and oth- ers 2024. 7. Huang and others 2025; Li and others 2023. Dahl and others (2024) found hallucinations in more than half the legal applications studied. Haltaufderheide and Ranisch (2024) document hallucinations in health applications. Lauscher and Glavaš (2025) show that hal- lucinations are pervasive across different languages, both high and low resource. 8. Barassi 2024; Chakraborty, Ornik and Driggs-C ampbell 2025; Jesson and others 2024; Jesson and others 2024; Maleki, Padmanabhan and Dutta 2024. 9. Berglund and others 2024. 10. McCoy and others 2024. 11. Ren and others 2025. 12. Nezhurina and others 2024. 13. Biecek and Samek 2024; McGrath and others 2022; Mumuni and Mumuni 2025; Song, Xu and Zhong 2025; Vafa and others 2024. 14. Zhao and others 2023. 15. Alzubaidi and others 2021, 2024. Efforts are ongoing to improve algorithms to address catastrophic forgetting (Alammar and others 2024; Kirkpatrick and others 2017). 16. Chen, Za- haria and Zou 2024; Du and others 2023; Hagos, Battle and Rawat 2024; McDonald, Papadopoulos and Benningfield 2024; Wei and others 2024; Yang and others 2024; Yenduri and others 2024. 17. Bender and others 2021. 18. On calculators, see Schick and others (2023); on web search engines, see Nakano and others (2021). 19. Lazaridou and others 2022; Lu and others 2023; Peng and others 2023a. 20. Pearl (2018) argues that there are inherent limitations to purely statistical models. 21. Bigoulaeva, Madabushi and Gurevych 2025; Kalai and Vem- pala 2024; R. Kirk and others 2023; Treiman, Ho and Kool 2024; Xu, Jain and Kankanhalli 2024; Zhou and others 2024. 22. Criddle 2025. other. But the exposure of agricultural occupations to suggests that AI cannot be seen merely as an expansion robotization (which can automate routine tasks) and of existing automation but instead must be interpreted large language models are inversely correlated.130 This as a qualitatively distinct landscape for automation. CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 27 As we increasingly interact with AI through mo- extension or deepening of the automation enabled dalities once reserved for human interaction, we by classical programming. The human effort to use need to understand how these new interactions with or adapt a large language model for a specific task machines differ from those in the classical program- must be weighed not in isolation but alongside the ming era. For example, AI outputs are not always the externalities (including energy consumption and same, even with the same inputs, and even subtle dif- environmental impacts),135 as well as long- tail risks ferences in inputs may lead to drastic differences in of unpredictability and misunderstanding. In many outputs (see box 1.1). Even if AI were predictable, hu- cases even nominally easy tasks assignable to a large mans have ambiguous goals, which alongside the im- language model may be better served using classical precision of regular spoken language compared with programming, mechanical machines or humans.136 programming language may result in model misinter- In many instances relying on AI means not simply pretations and communication breakdowns.131 This automating tasks but also having humans inspect risks amplifying harms, given the constraints on ac- and evaluate AI outputs.137 For example, deploying curacy and reliability that may emerge from human– AI in public health while ignoring human- mediated AI interaction.132 knowledge may be counterproductive.138 Even if we reach a point where AI- powered clinicians can auto- mate most of the clinical workflow, patients could be Many tasks in which AI is deployed less willing to accept medical advice from an in silico require a human presence doctor— d emonstrating AI aversion.139 Indeed, cur- rent evidence suggests that information assumed to Just because AI — and particularly generative AI such have been fully automated through AI is less valued as large language models — is very proficient at some by people and has less impact on their beliefs and ac- tasks — or aspects of tasks — does not mean it can serve tions.140 Although increased familiarity with AI and as a surrogate for humans in those tasks. One key newer and better AI abilities may alter these dynam- reason: many tasks that can nominally be automat- ics, we cannot assume that the result will, or should, ed require, on closer inspection, a human presence. be widespread embrace of AI- generated information For instance, AI is often touted for its ability to write and decisions across all domains. code. Yet code is only the tangible output of the intan- gible process of software development. Before code is written, software development teams must find Complementarity of AI and humans ways to manage stakeholder interests, needs, values and more. Code comes together throughout an itera- Human input may be particularly valuable in situa- tive and dynamic social process of lengthy conversa- tions where even small deviations in AI outputs have tions, negotiations, (human) user experience testing a wide range of implications (from extraordinarily and vision of the values and needs underlying these good to catastrophic)141 and high stakes (which chap- processes. All of this is far beyond the reach of AI be- ter 5 defines in more detail). Of course, humans also cause nominal task performance is a far cry from dy- make mistakes, and it may be better to offload some namic social processes. This is just one example, but tasks to reliable machines, given that they are often many jobs reveal these complex, human, social pro- capable of tirelessly, dispassionately and consist- cesses that will likely remain beyond the reach of AI. ently engaging in tasks.142 But unlike AI, humans have In addition, occupations may seem in the abstract to “skin in the game” and a unique capacity to contex- be decomposable by tasks, but this is often more dif- tually appreciate and weigh the value of risks and ficult in practice.133 Moreover, even if it is technical- benefits — something they can uniquely contribute to ly feasible for AI to execute some tasks, people may high- stakes contexts. These features present a key not value it doing so if they seek authenticity, human opportunity for complementarity between humans connection or identification with other humans.134 and AI. In the top right quadrant of figure 1.7 the role A more nuanced understanding of human–AI in- of people is central to defining priorities, assessing teraction goes beyond assuming that AI is just an choices and taking responsibility. Some high- stakes 28 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure 1.7 Beyond the routine–nonroutine tasks dichotomy: What artificial intelligence (AI) can automate depends on the stakes and on the range of potential implications AI REQUIRES HUMAN EVALUATION COMPLEMENT AI CAN AUTOMATE situations are self- evident (life or death), but ulti- media.144 But there is little agreement on labelling mately humans determine what decisions are high suicide- related content between AI and humans (in stakes and will need to decide which contexts require particular, AI cannot distinguish mentions of suicide machines alone, humans alone or some combination in a humorous context from those that correspond to of the two.143 Critically, these valuations depend on, genuine ideation).145 Moreover, when, whether and but are not defined by, the state of AI and its abilities how emotional surveillance through AI is warranted — so no manifestation of AI will obviate the need for are important and likely culturally varying questions. careful consideration of when human evaluation of Relying on AI outputs without human evaluation in AI is required. That implies the undesirability of fully high-s takes contexts is dangerous, even if it might be automating many decisions but opens an unbounded helpful to have AI cull from social media references to set of opportunities for human augmentation. suicidal ideation that a human can evaluate. For example, tasks in medicine related to clinical While large language models have the potential practice, medical research or medical education are to ease access to medical knowledge and facilitate high stakes, and even tiny differences in AI outputs access to healthcare, risks of scientific misconduct, can lead to vastly different outcomes for people. To distribution of misinformation and simple hallucina- see how this matters, consider that people who ex- tions imply the need for humans with at least some perience mental health challenges are more likely to medical knowledge to evaluate the models’ outputs express what they think on social media than with doc- for these high- stakes tasks.146 A concrete illustration tors, opening the possibility of relying on AI to assign of the limitations of large language models in medi- emotional labels, including suicidal ideation, to the cine is that they are error- prone in a simple task such vast amount of content that people express on social as mapping medical diagnoses to clinical codes, CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 29 EDIW WORRAN LOW HIGH STAKES SNOITACILPMI LAITNETOP FO EGNAR DOCTORS, LAWYERS PLUMBERS, ELECTRICIANS EVITINGOC LAUNAM SEQUENCES OF PRECISE AND REPLICABLE STEPS THAT CAN BE SPECIFIED FULLY IN ADVANCE ROUTINE NONROUTINE Note: The red ovals represent tasks that can be automated with classical programming and AI. The red oval in the graph on the left is larger than the one in the graph related to classical programming (figure 1.5) because the potential for automation with AI extends to some nonroutine tasks. The teal oval represents tasks where AI presents new opportunities for augmentation. Source: Human Development Report Office. limiting AI’s ability to automate this task and requir- The major implication emerging from this argu- ing human evaluation of the models’ outputs.147 Sim- ment, along with a consideration of the character- ilarly, large language models are “unaware” of their istics of AI (box 1.2), is that the patterns of labour medical knowledge limitations and provide confident displacement and reinstatement, and the expertise in answers to multiple- choice questions even when no demand to take advantage of AI, require supplement- correct answers were available: these outputs pose ing the analysis of the dichotomy between routine risks when relying on large language models without and nonroutine tasks that was so useful in the classi- human evaluation in clinical settings.148 cal programming stage.149 Box 1.2 The perils and affordances of artificial intelligence Recent artificial intelligence (AI) developments have generated much interest about safety, both in the potential for misuse of AI and in the accidental risks that may emerge as unintended consequences.1 Some evidence suggests that even when designed to mitigate these risks (sometimes referred to as aligning AI with human values), large language models are capable of mimicking or faking this alignment,2 covertly pursuing misaligned goals,3 posing security and privacy risks4 and disclosing sensitive, private or illegal information.5 At the same time human limitations (such as difficulty distinguishing between human- and AI- generated text), along with the expansion of content generated by AI,6 pose new risks of misuse7 or accidents.8 AI has been around for a long time, so where does the renewed interest in safety come from? In part, from the new affordances of AI and four notable features. First, AI can exhibit abilities in areas outside those intended or considered in its design. Unlike classical program- ming, where machines excelled at the task they were programmed to perform, large language models trained to pre- dict the next word in a text sequence have proved helpful in tasks ranging from translation to writing computer code.9 Second, AI can be generative, producing novel output based on descriptive prompts expressed in everyday lan- guage, unlike classical computer machines that execute instructions only from prespecified scripts. In early 2024 it was reported that ChatGPT alone was generating 100 billion words a day:10 within one year this would be roughly equivalent to the amount of high- quality text available on the internet.11 Third, AI can personalize and customize outputs adaptively and iteratively — and do it quickly and at scale, unlike classical programming’s outputs in the form of one size fits all, with limited opportunities for rapid and dynamic customization at scale.12 Applications for personalization hold particular promise in education and healthcare.13 Fourth, AI is very efficient at discerning useful patterns in data that are hard for people to do, while classical program- ming can provide insights only from data guided by human intuition.14 One practical application of this feature of AI is the rapid progress in predicting protein folding in biology, something that used to take humans much time and effort.15 As such, the same features that motivate concern for AI safety underlie much of its potential for augmentation. Excising these features is thus a simple but limiting solution, requiring alternatives that guide AI implementation away from harm and towards opportunities. Notes 1. The debate has been particularly heightened for open foundational models. Foundational models are the cornerstone of the current AI boom, spanning technological advances, deployment and adoption and sustaining the latest stage of development of computational machines identified earlier in the chapter (Bommasani and others 2021). Open foundational models release more information to the public, which allows for greater customization (even if the designation of what open means is disputed; Widder, Whittaker and West 2024). For risks associated with open foundational models, see Bommasani and others (2024) and Kapoor and others (2024). For risks associated with large language models more broadly, see Chua and others (2024) and B. Wang and others (2023). For the specific risk of data poisoning in medical large language models, see Alber and others (2025). 2. Greenblatt and others 2024. 3. Meinke and others 2024. 4. Das, Amini and Wu 2025. 5. Liu and others 2025. 6. Martínez and others 2024. 7. Hackenburg and Margetts 2024a, 2024b; Ibrahim and others 2023; Jakesch, Han- cock and Naaman 2023. 8. Gans 2024a; Kidd and Birhane 2023. 9. Technically referred to sometimes as out-o f-distribution generalization (Song, Xu and Zhong 2025; Yang and others 2023a). 10. Griffin 2024. 11. Specifically, available on Common Crawl, based on the estimates by Villalobos and others (2024). 12. Z. Zhang, Rossi and others 2024. 13. On health applications, see Adapa and others (2025) and Delanerolle and others (2021). On education, see Bewersdorff and others (2025), Labadze, Grigolia and Machaidze (2023), Mollick and others (2024), Moundridou, Matzakos and Doukakis (2024), Rudolph and others (2024) and Tan and others (2024). 14. More rigorously, machine learning excels at eliciting mathematical structure in unstructured data (Dell 2024; Kwon and others 2024). 15. Baek and others 2021; Jumper and others 2021; Kovalevskiy, Mateos-G arcia and Tunyasuvunakool 2024; Shimanovich and Hartl 2024. This enables advances in many areas of medicine and beyond (Mifsud and others 2024; Topol 2024b) and progress towards understanding the cognitive and biology of smell (Smith 2024). For an application of using large language models to elicit political latent positions, see Wu and others (2023). 30 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Expanding science and creativity Augmenting human intelligence The characteristics of AI also create new opportu- Beyond the potential to enhance creativity, a key bar- nities for humans to interact with AI in ways that rier that modern AI can overcome is that nonroutine can accelerate discovery and innovation and trig- tasks often rely on tacit or difficult to codify ger new frontiers of creativity.150 Like any other knowledge — largely out of reach of machines in clas- general- purpose technology, such as electricity or sical programming.167 What will the increase in the the internet, AI will spread in multiple applications range of tasks and types that can be automated imply across the economy and society, continuing to im- for labour demand? prove,151 ideally increasing productivity,152 a key The novel landscape can be intuited by careful- determinant of standards of living.153 But AI is, ac- ly considering the types of nonroutine tasks that are cording to economic historian Nicholas Craft, an not possible or desirable to automate.168 For example, invention of a method of invention (chapter 6).154 some tasks of primary school teachers can be partial- The US National Academy of Sciences went further ly automated with generative AI, such as preparing or in saying that AI is “arguably the most general of all refining lessons and grading some forms of assign- general-p urpose technologies.”155 AI can increase ments.169 Yet others are clearly beyond the practi- the level and potentially the rate of innovation cal and normatively acceptable scope of AI, such as productivity.156 implementing discipline or intuiting when students’ home lives may require intervention. “ AI also creates new opportunities for The scope of AI’s potential for augmentation re- humans to interact with AI in ways that lates to qualitative changes that intelligence augmen- can accelerate discovery and innovation tation can yield for human tasks.170 Three salient but and trigger new frontiers of creativity nonexhaustive ways for such augmentation include making advanced expertise more accessible; requir- Rather than automating tasks in creative pro- ing human evaluation of AI outputs, which creates cesses associated with scientific and technological the need for new types of expertise; and personaliz- innovation, the key here is human intelligence aug- ing and customizing rapidly and at scale. mentation.157 Automating some nonroutine creative tasks can erode demand for creative occupations.158 AI makes advanced expertise more accessible Offloading cognitive effort to AI can reduce critical thinking.159 AI can increase scientific output but de- Building on the internet as a repository of knowledge, crease human scientific understanding160 and vari- AI provides a novel means of accessing and recombin- ation in scientific outputs.161 In contrast, leveraging ing that information in a way that can reduce barriers the complementary capabilities of AI and humans to to accessing advanced expertise.171 Historically, the accelerate innovation162 and creativity more broad- supply of experts is limited because advanced exper- ly163 could boost the rate of innovation without these tise requires education, training and accumulation of harmful effects. For example, AI models that trained experience through learning- by-doing, which takes themselves to play chess not only consistently beat time, effort and resources. Although classical pro- humans but also make chess moves that have never gramming can often retrieve information produced by been documented as being used by humans before, experts, consuming this information and applying it which in turn inspires top players to improve their to a given task has typically required expertise.172 performance.164 Finding ways of bridging the human- While there is no reason to expect that demand AI knowledge gap beyond games could expand cre- for advanced expertise will decline, constraints on ativity across many fields.165 Creativity involves the supply side could be eased given that AI can as- novelty, surprise and value — even if AI can help with sist in tasks ranging from computer coding to help- the first two features, value will always be up to us to ing a struggling student understand a math problem determine.166 to using regular spoken language as a universal CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 31 interface in healthcare.173 For example, a recent sur- However, expanded access to expertise is not whol- vey of AI startups found that only 10 percent of their ly without risks. It could result in AI “experts” whose products required users to have expert coding or data responses merely mimic expertise, ultimately provid- skills.174 A potential implication is that an expanding ing none at all and merely justifying whatever answer pool of “functional experts” with advanced exper- the requester sought — effectively decoupling apti- tise could depress the expertise wage premium that tude from understanding.180 Similarly, distillation of emerged during classical programming as a result some concepts can go only so far or require human of the automation of routine tasks. This potential subjective judgement, such that decisions based on downward wage pressure on high- paying occupations AI- acquired expertise may be riskier than those from could counter the wage polarization that emerged in veritable human experts.181 many countries, if advanced expertise jobs no longer Yet tangible benefits of access to expertise through command outsized premiums — but remain well- paid AI already exist. For example, access to AI improves nonetheless.175 The US labour market, for instance, the performance of the least experienced and lower appears not to be polarizing anymore.176 skilled call- centre workers. The benefits decline to Reducing the barriers to accessing advanced ex- undetectable among the most experienced workers pertise does not mean that advanced experts do not (figure 1.8). Similar results have been documented in benefit from AI. For creative tasks higher skilled em- writing tasks,182 software development183 and man- ployees do benefit, consistent with the argument that agement consultancy,184 among others.185 Younger AI can augment creativity.177 Early evidence suggests and less experienced workers appear to be adopting that using AI to accomplish creative tasks reduces the AI at a faster rate, across a range of occupations, po- value of domain- specific expertise relative to broad- tentially enabling them to achieve higher perfor- er cognitive adaptability.178 But while AI elevates the mance more quickly.186 Those more aware of their performance of professional artists, it also makes the own limitations in ability benefit the most from output of laypeople worse by a smaller margin than working with AI.187 These effects may also appear as would have been the case without AI.179 changes in organizational structures: firms that invest Figure 1.8 The lower the level of skill and experience, the more workers benefit from artificial intelligence (AI) Skill Tenure Change in resolutions per hour Change in resolutions per hour 0.6 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 –0.2 –0.2 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 0 1–2 3–6 7–12 12 or (lowest) (highest) more Agent skill at AI deployment Agent tenure at AI deployment (months) Note: Impact on the performance of consumer representative agents after AI is deployed, measured as the change in the number of case resolutions per hour. Source: Brynjolfsson, Li and Raymond 2025. 32 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 more in AI show a flattening hierarchy, with a rise in better for intended applications. Sustainer encom- the share of workers at junior levels and a drop in the passes tasks associated with keeping up with AI pro- share of middle and senior management workers.188 gress and ensuring that both skills and organizational Whether these sector- specific findings apply to a processes make the most of opportunities as they broader set of tasks and more complex occupations evolve over time. — and can thus extend to society as a whole — and whether they persist over time remain unknown.189 AI can personalize and customize services If they do, or choices are made such that they do, AI to unique community or individual needs adoption may not polarize the labour market the way the diffusion of classical programming did. As the past decade has demonstrated, for better and At the same time new gaps may emerge as a result for worse, AI can personalize and customize servic- of differences in ability or willingness to use AI, so it es quickly and at scale. Much of the focus so far has is not a given that AI adoption will always have a lev- been on the ability to personalize messages that can elling effect. This is particularly concerning given microtarget political and marketing persuasion.197 the evidence of deep gender gaps in the use of gen- But personalization well leveraged can open new op- erative AI, which persist even when access to AI is portunities to make bespoke education198 and health- enhanced.190 care.199 Indeed, the nonhuman yet personalizable features of AI may similarly allow people facing em- AI outputs demanding human evaluation barrassing or stigmatizing circumstances to interact require new types of expertise with it more easily.200 If these personalization possibilities are deployed Even if advanced expertise is available through AI, in ways that substantially improve quality, they could some translational expertise may be required to in- increase productivity in service sectors such as health- terpret and evaluate AI outputs in many situations.191 care and education that have lagged the rest of the The risk of AI giving bad advice implies, particular- economy in productivity gains.201 This may be impor- ly in high- stakes situations, the need for humans to tant in low- and middle- income countries, where em- evaluate AI outputs192 and use AI more as a collabo- ployment is expanding more rapidly in services than in rator than as something that automates tasks in these other sectors, particularly in settings where the transi- situations.193 tion through manufacturing jobs is muted or difficult, as discussed earlier. In addition, personalization can “ Taking advantage of AI–human also improve the effectiveness of learning and access to complementarity will probably require new healthcare in low- income countries and low- resource types of tasks and related expertise, in three settings.202 Deploying AI to boost personalization of new roles: explainer, trainer and sustainer healthcare and education could, over time, increase, rather than depress, demand for healthcare workers So, taking advantage of AI–human complementa- and teachers. 203 However, personalization brings new rity will probably require new types of tasks and re- risks, associated with the potential for large-s cale pro- lated expertise, in three new roles: explainer, trainer filing, privacy violations and exploitation of vulnerable and sustainer.194 Explainer calls for translational ex- people, requiring carefully calibrated bounds so that pertise, so that outputs from AI can be evaluated and these risks do not outweigh benefits.204 assessed before being incorporated into decision- Personalization should not be taken so far as to as- making.195 Trainer encompasses new tasks such as sume AI is a soothsayer able to predict or determin- prompt engineering and augmented generation re- istically alter individual outcomes. AI tools (many of trieval to get the most out of AI. It can extend to more which are machine learning based but not genera- upstream tasks of customizing AI models for domain- tive AI) that provide predictive information are often specific applications — ChatGPT already has hun- sold with the promise of being able to automate de- dreds of thousands of user- created domain- specific cisions, replacing human decisionmaking.205 In par- applications.196 This is about ensuring that AI works ticular, predictive optimization — AI that both predicts CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 33 future outcomes and makes decisions about individ- multiple media (writing, voice) and for responses that uals based on those predictions (examples include organize and interpret information, as well as for sug- predictions for pretrial risk, child maltreatment, job gestions about what else to ask and do.211 A key con- performance and dropping out of school) — risks sys- straint in enabling firms in low- and middle- income tematically failing on its own terms.206 Recognizing countries to engage in industrial upgrading (using ad- AI’s inability to function as an oracle can instead ena- vanced technologies and products already developed ble it to be a source of informed decisionmaking rath- elsewhere) is lack of know- how, which AI could allevi- er than a substitute.207 ate.212 Similarly, AI can facilitate the engagement of re- search institutions in low- income countries with global Envisioning the human scientific endeavours.213 development opportunity of AI Second, there are more opportunities to generate positive spillovers from AI investments that spread Understanding what AI can do, what is new and dif- across the economy. Even when countries succeed in ferent from previous digital tools, gives us a way of one type of exports to global markets, it is an ongoing imagining pathways through which it could advance challenge to generate employment along the value human development. An important element will be chain or in other sectors. For example, manufacturing to design and implement adequate policy and regula- firms in Bangladesh have been successful in exporting tory environments adapted to each country’s unique garments, generating a lot of employment in that ac- characteristics.208 All countries confront this chal- tivity, but have had limited success in translating this lenge, but lower HDI countries face the addition- to activities upstream (design) or downstream (mar- al challenge that previously available development keting) from garment production or to other sectors.214 pathways through export- led manufacturing are nar- Even the most successful firms in low- and middle- rowing. So how could AI help? Without being exhaus- income countries face challenges with established tive, here are some possibilities. backward and forward links in the country, given that global value chains are, in a sense, premised on “ AI does more than offer access to information, those links not being available in the country.215 And, which still requires someone to know what to look as shown above, to remain competitive in global value for through a query on a web search engine. AI can chains, firms in low- and middle- income countries work more as a resource that enables access not often need to invest more in capital- and technology- only to better information but also to better ways intensive production, in contexts where labour supply of using that information through interaction or high costs are not firm constraints, so gains in firm with AI and collaboration with other people productivity stay largely within the firm.216 Investment in AI appears to have greater potential to generate First, AI can enable people, organizations and firms spillovers across sectors, which opens new opportuni- to access not only information but also know-h ow. The ties for economic diversification (chapter 6).217 internet has provided access to vast amounts of infor- Third, AI opens new opportunities to expand trade mation and new means for global communication, in and increase the productivity of services. On trade which have created many opportunities and social AI lowers the language and culture barriers in inter- dividends in low- income settings.209 But AI does more national communication.218 On productivity and em- than offer access to information, which still requires ployment in services, strategies could include: someone to know what to look for through a query on a • Working with large incumbent firms to increase web search engine. AI can work more as a resource that local employment. enables access not only to better information but also • Enabling smaller firms to access and use AI to en- to better ways of using that information through inter- hance their productive capabilities. action with AI and collaboration with other people.210 • Empowering workers directly, in firms or when AI enables access to something that resembles know- self- employed, with access to AI in ways that com- how. It allows for questions that are more open ended plement low- skilled workers to make them more and unstructured, in multiple languages and through productive.219 34 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 More- productive and cheaper services can boost low- and middle- income countries, many of whom demand when lower service prices allow more people are self- employed and engaged in home rather than to consume those services, expanding employment market production.228 AI applications range from further.220 making cutting- edge agricultural knowledge more ac- Many workers in low- and middle- income coun- cessible by providing location- specific advice (large tries are self- employed (even outside agriculture) language models are sometimes seen to even outper- and thus do not benefit from being part of an organ- form traditional agricultural extension workers)229 or ization that can specialize tasks, organize the division more-a ccurate and real-t ime weather information (par- of labour and invest in technology.221 For example, ticularly important in rainfed agriculture, as climate two- thirds of the 1 million freight drivers in Brazil are change makes this practice ever more challenging).230 self- employed, but the recent emergence of locally Fifth, unlike electricity or the internet, access to AI developed digital platforms has enabled productivity does not require additional physical infrastructure; it increases in this crucial sector by matching workers is immediately accessible to those online. The draw- and freight tasks and improving routing. More than back is that people who cannot be online face an even half of road freight in Brazil is intermediated through bigger disadvantage231 — even more reason to increase these homegrown platforms.222 One tends to think of electricity access and close digital divides.232 In rural transport services as being nontradable, but a task- areas of low- income countries, electricity has com- based (rather than product- based) analysis of trade pounding benefits for human development when shows that this sector accounts for about 10 percent paired with complementary things people can do of exports for countries at all income levels.223 with it, so AI can empower these communities in new ways.233 Equally important are the risks of exclusion “ AI does not require additional physical from the producer side of AI, which being far from infrastructure; it is immediately accessible AI- producing hubs and lacking access to computing to those online. The drawback is that people power can exacerbate.234 Human capabilities to use who cannot be online face an even bigger AI are also crucial, starting with basic achievements disadvantage—even more reason to increase in numeracy and literacy. Only 6 percent of young electricity access and close digital divides people in Sub- Saharan Africa, 10 percent in South Asia and 35 percent in Latin America and the Carib- Fourth, AI’s flexibility can empower people to seek bean meet a global standard of basic skills in math and iterate solutions to their problems or pursuits that and science.235 But AI can also be deployed to bridge are tailored to diverse and local contexts and even to these gaps, with recent evidence showing how AI can the unique specificity of individual firms. One chal- be more efficient than the web by helping teachers lenge of policy advice and development interventions in Sierra Leone in ways that are 90 percent cheaper is that they can be overly rigid, as with efforts to pro- than relying on traditional search engines.236 mote entrepreneurial activity that do not adapt to dif- There are many potential pathways in which AI can ferent settings or dynamic changes in the economy or enhance human development, and those outlined society.224 AI allows for continual experimentation and above may not pan out. Along with the potential, accumulation of learning over time, further expand- there are the risks that AI’s deployment will follow ing the opportunities already afforded by digital tools the path of classical programming, which was often for entrepreneurial and small and medium enterprise not pro- worker, given its bias towards automation.237 growth.225 Small and medium enterprises are often Whatever the future holds, development policy needs resource- constrained but can deploy AI to identify cost- to be informed by the distinctive nature of AI and effective approaches to optimize operations.226 AI can what it can do for human development. Envisioning also be used to improve the supply of goods and servic- how AI can advance human development can inspire es from small and medium enterprises by augmenting the general direction to aim towards, leaving flexibili- the creativity of business owners and employees.227 ty to adapt to unique national and local contexts. The The potential is also vast in agriculture, a sec- remainder of the Report further fleshes out the ways tor that still employs substantial shares of people in AI can be made to work for people. CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 35 SPOTLIGHT 1.1 Humans have agency, algorithms do not Johannes Jaeger, Department of Philosophy, University of Vienna; Complexity Science Hub, Vienna, Austria Is humanity’s future still in our own hands? Or will we can do? As it turns out, the ability to realize what is soon be outcompeted and replaced by machines? Re- relevant for oneself is common and exclusive to all cent developments in artificial intelligence (AI) and living beings—from a simple bacterium to a sophis- the public discussions that surround it can make one ticated human being.4 Obviously, there are huge dif- doubt. The dominant narrative is that of imminent ferences in the degree to which different organisms artificial general intelligence. There is a widespread engage in framing problems and in the complexity of expectation (or fear) that machines will soon surpass the problems framed. But the fact remains: even the human thinking capacity to achieve some kind of su- simplest bug can do things that our most sophisticat- perintelligence.1 This pursuit of artificial general in- ed AI cannot do (and will never be able to) because telligence goes back to the very roots of AI research. they lie outside the algorithms’ design specifications. Famously, Alan Turing postulated a test in 1950 (he called it the “imitation game”)2 that would reveal when a machine exhibits intelligence equivalent to Living organisms manufacture themselves that of a human being. However, what this means precisely remains undefined and, on close inspection, This special organismic power is called basic agency,5 undefinable. and there is nothing mysterious about it. It is entirely compatible with what we know about thermodynamics and the physics of living systems. Agency arises from Algorithms cannot frame problems the peculiar organization of material and energetic flows in a living organism that enable it to manufacture Intelligence, counter to widespread intuition, relies itself. Biologists call this autopoiesis—self-production.6 not only on our ability to solve problems (to com- No machine that humans have built so far can do this. pute) but also, crucially, on our ability to frame them And it looks unlikely that we will acquire the capability (to pass judgement on what a relevant problem is in to build any truly autopoietic artefacts anytime soon. the first place). Evidently, the two are not the same.3 The basic idea behind self-manufacture is a little This is why artificial “intelligence” is such a terrible counterintuitive but not extremely difficult to grasp. misnomer: algorithms cannot frame problems. They The counterintuitive part is that the organization of always operate within a fixed frame. The problems an organism folds in on itself, like a snake that bites they solve must be defined for them (however flexibly its own tail. It is self-referential or reflexive in a way and indirectly) by the human agent who designed the that our mechanistic machine designs generally are hardware, programmed them, specified their target not. In particular, the reflexivity of an organism’s or- functions and annotated their training data. It is in ganization is different from mere feedback regulation, this precise sense that algorithms are not intelligent which we do use a lot in engineering. Feedback occurs at all! Indeed, as a best-case scenario, the technolo- between processes that could also exist independent gy we call AI is employed as intelligence augmenta- of each other. In contrast, the capacity to self-manu- tion, not to replace us but to increase our own human facture implies a living system consisting of physical thinking capabilities. and chemical processes that not only regulate but We may now ask: what is it that enables a human also construct each other. Each one could not even being to be intelligent? What allows us to frame our exist without the others being present and involved own problems? And is this something only humans in its own generation while in turn contributing to the 36 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 generation of other processes. This peculiar way of computational process when it does not receive or collective co-construction is called organizational clo- process any input. An organism cannot do that. It sure.7 It is the generative principle behind autopoiesis. needs to constantly work to continue existing—every In such an organizationally closed system, the single moment of its life. causal control over what gets built next lies (at least To survive means to preserve your self-manufac- to some extent) within the circular organization of turing organization. Accordingly, there are good and the system itself. In other words, as a living organ- bad ways to invest your efforts in survival, some that ism, your future is yours to decide. Within limits, succeed and some that fail to keep you alive. And with of course: you cannot break the laws of physics, nor this basic distinction, there come problems that are should you behave in a way that jeopardizes the in- either relevant or not for you in your particular situ- tegrity of your own organization, as this would mean ation. But if you do not have to invest work into man- death. Nonetheless, you have a basic kind of agency ufacturing yourself, if you cannot perish (because you because your future actions are (to some degree) au- are not alive and you are not a self), nothing is rele- tonomous of what is going on in your surroundings. vant to you. Algorithms are not alive. Therefore, they You not only manufacture yourself, but you ultimate- cannot solve the problem of relevance, they cannot ly also determine the rules of your own behaviour. frame their own problems, because the concept of relevance simply does not exist for them, as they have no self to be manufactured and maintained under Can a piece of software build the hardware precarious circumstances. it is running on while running on it? An apt machine analogy would be a piece of soft- Algorithms can only help us grow—and cannot ware that builds the hardware it is running on while grow beyond what they already are running on it. Or in mathematical terms a model of a whole living organism would have to be based on a It should be obvious that this has immediate and pro- system of equations that somehow writes itself. We found consequences for policies concerning human have very few formal tools today that can help us ana- development. The basic autonomous agency out- lyse and understand the behaviour of such self-man- lined above opens the path for continued growth and ufacturing systems. open-ended evolution in the living world. In contrast, You may also have noticed the use of “should” an algorithm, operating within its fixed frame, always above. It means that autopoiesis brings some sort of remains at its characteristic level of complexity. Only normativity to an organism’s existence: rules accord- autopoietic organisms can transcend themselves.8 ing to which it ought to behave to stay alive. These Only they can evolve or learn to exist and behave in rules are the precursors to our familiar human values: more complex ways than they used to, up until now. a bacterium “should” go for the sugar and avoid the Algorithms can only help us grow. They cannot grow toxin in order to survive and reproduce. Such norms beyond what they already are. Humans are creative are not a matter of thoughtful intention in the case of in a way that algorithmic AI can never be. the bacterium but are automatisms shaped through And this is how, from basic agency, we get the evolution by natural selection. Still, the basic drive to emergence of cognition and thinking in animals with survive, which we presuppose for such rules to exist, a nervous system and, much later in evolution, con- is something that comes from within any kind of liv- sciousness and the whole human experience of inten- ing system. tion and reflexive self-awareness. The details of this And from this drive we also get the idea of rele- evolutionary process (and the very nature of many of vance: life is precarious, and living beings need to these higher-level phenomena) are still poorly under- constantly invest physical work into staying alive. stood. But it seems highly plausible that autopoiesis, This is another aspect that distinguishes them from self-production, is a basic prerequisite for all of them.9 machines: a chatbot does not get bored between This should give us a new appreciation of ourselves queries because it literally pauses its existence as a and everything else that is alive on this planet. Our CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 37 ability to act autonomously, to be truly creative and a different future is possible and well within our reach, to grow beyond our present selves can only be imi- exactly because we carry our fate in our own hands as tated by algorithmic AI technology. This leads us to autonomous agents. fundamentally reassess the limitations of AI, as well as other social and cognitive technologies that aim to mimic human thinking and behaviour. For instance, Algorithms can augment our talk of AI agents is grossly misleading. These tech- autonomy, agency and freedom nologies are sophisticated tools that should enhance our agency and intelligence, but they are not agents Instead of voluntarily giving our agency away to al- in themselves. They cannot replace our creativity, our gorithms that have a mere semblance of it, we should thinking; they can only supplement it. focus on novel ways of designing and interacting with Unfortunately, both the prevalent business model our technological tools that augment our autonomy, for AI and the discussion of its capacities (in particu- agency and liberty—our ability to take responsibili- lar, claims about artificial general intelligence) are un- ty for our own future—instead of diminishing them. helpful in this regard. They misleadingly project (and The choice remains ours, and it will become a central often actively aim to bring about) a future where it is concern for human development over the next few inevitable that humans will be outcompeted and per- decades, as more and more powerful imitatory tech- haps even replaced by “superintelligent” technology. nologies will emerge and be advertised and sold as Yet, as we have seen, no robust argument supports this “agential” or “intelligent.” Under these circumstanc- view. Machines do not want to take over the world. Al- es it is more important than ever to distinguish hype gorithms (by their very nature) do not want anything. from reality. If machines conquer the world, it is because we, their How our complex natural, social and technological human creators, have instructed them to do so. context affects us is highly nontrivial. This is not an This puts the responsibility straight back into our argument claiming that humans act with unrestricted own courtyard. The buck stops with us. AI by itself may liberty in isolation. Nor is it an attempt to condemn not take agency from us, but humans can employ it in technology in general. Obviously, there are many very destructive ways. We can be induced or forced to positive and powerful uses for intelligence augmen- give away our autonomy, for instance, when algorithms tation. In fact, intelligence augmentation is some- automate creative tasks (AI “art”) or decisionmaking thing we urgently need, as our agency gets more and processes (including expressing our democratic rights). more intricately embedded and extended in an in- Applications in surveillance and automated warfare, creasingly entangled environment. or the disruption of our social fabric, are also highly But in the end the buck stops with us: the human problematic aspects of AI—posing potentially existen- agents. The source of all this complex agential dynam- tial risks—that should not be underestimated. Yet, truly ic ultimately lies within us. It will be crucial for human recognizing the difference between human agency and development in the coming decades that we recognize the lack thereof in algorithmic systems also means that and remember this simple and empowering fact. NOTES 1. This term was introduced by philosopher Nick Bostrom (2014). 6. This is most accessibly explained in Maturana and Varela (1987). For a more technical (but also more rigorous) treatment, see Hofmeyr (2021) 2. See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Turing_test. The original publication is and Rosen (1991). On the connection to agency, see Di Paolo and others Turing (1950). (2005). 3. Weizenbaum (1976) focuses on this important distinction. See also Drey- 7. Building on the work of Maturana and Varela (1987), this concept was fus (1972) or, more recently, Cantwell Smith (2019). developed by Moreno and Mossio (2015). See also Montévil and Mossio 4. For the details of this argument, see Jaeger (2024) and Jaeger and others (2015). (2024). 8. How organisms come to know the world and how they learn through this 5. Di Paolo and others (2005) provide a detailed and comprehensive defini- experience are described in Jaeger and others (2024) and Roli and oth- tion of basic organismic agency. ers (2022). 9. This argument is outlined in detail in Jaeger and others (2024). 38 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 SPOTLIGHT 1.2 A human development perspective on the pursuit of artificial general intelligence The framework proposed here to provide a human From building hardware to writing software development perspective on the past and future evo- lution of computational machines is based on the The human effort to create a Turing machine was generality of tasks that machines can do, freeing peo- not erased but shifted from the physical to the digi- ple to do other things and the human effort required tal. Subsequent generations toiled away at developing for machines to do those tasks. The chapter describes and evolving the many technologies in hardware and the emergence of pre–Turing machines with the ex- software required to achieve the performance of to- ample of the Hollerith tabulation machine. For fur- day’s computers, smartphones and the internet.4 The ther context the US Constitution requires a census torturous pathway from early Turing machines to the every 10 years, and with rapid population growth in modern internet was characterized by punctuated the late 19th century, the manual processing of hand- equilibria that time and time again redefined how such written returns, relatively efficient earlier on, took tasks were implemented in silico. Not until the symbol- eight years for the 1880 census, for a population of ic encoding of instructions followed by high-level pro- around 50 million. So, in 1890 it was decided to au- gramming languages was the full potential of Turing tomate key aspects of data processing, specifically machines realized to execute tasks with little human the manual tabulation of paper returns, with the Hol- effort. Punch cards, a relic of the Hollerith machines, lerith tabulation machine. laboriously encoded 80 characters at a time, translat- Automating tabulation reduced the processing ing low-level languages to bits and bytes. This process time to two years for a larger population of 63 mil- gave way to programs that could be typed out explic- lion. Yet, the machine did not replace clerks. They itly and a taxonomy of higher-level languages that ab- still had several other tasks that were not automated stracted away the fine-grained lower-level languages. (for instance, summarizing data and writing and for- Each transition was necessary because, just as popu- matting reports), and the machine created new tasks lation growth necessitated the Hollerith machine, the (such as transferring data from handwritten forms to growth in the complexity of software required finding punch cards that the tabulation machine could read).1 ways to reduce the human effort required to write it. As with AI and radiologists, the machine to automate a task not only created new tasks for humans but also allowed them to spend more time on tasks that the From letting machines learn on their own to machine could not do. producing machines anyone can talk to Another example is the Colossus computer, built in the mid-1940s and installed at Bletchley Park, Classical programming approaches faced constraints England, to help to break encrypted messages dur- in executing some tasks that are very easy for humans ing World War II.2 One of the people involved in this but very hard to fully specify with a set of instruc- effort was mathematician Alan Turing, who put for- tions, imposing bounds on expanding generality to, ward in 1937 a theoretical model of computation say, image recognition. It is easy for a person—and that inspired general-purpose hardware able to han- even for a pigeon5—to identify a chair in an image, dle multiple tasks by being fed a set of instructions.3 but writing a program that does so is very hard.6 Just The implementation of this idea corresponds to the as there were too many citizens to count in the 19th second stage in the evolution of computational ma- century US, the diversity of objects considered chairs chines, that of Turing machines. would require an impractically long time to devise a CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 39 rule set that covers them all. Even if such a program Artificial general intelligence, when we could be constructed, one would likely have to start reach it, is up to us, not the technology anew for a program to identify a bed. Recognizing this challenge, an alternative approach We can understand generality on a scale from very had been pursued since the 1950s: rather than write low levels (single-purpose hardware of the pre– instructions for the machine to execute, assemble ex- Turing machines that can perform only one task) to amples of how the task is done and let the machine somewhat higher. Correspondingly, the human effort learn. This marks a third stage: AI implemented to purpose a machine for executing a task can also be through machine learning, which grew in popularity put on a scale. Without formally quantifying these and applications in the 1990s and ultimately proved two dimensions, it is possible to illustrate the evo- spectacularly successful at image recognition in the lution of computational machines as a progression late 2000s.7 It solved a host of long-standing chal- towards greater generality with lower human effort lenges in image recognition in the decades since, such per machine-delegated task, such that forthcoming as detecting suspicious portions of radiological imag- stages may be interpreted as the continuation of that es. Machine learning has extended far beyond images evolution. to many other tasks based on predictive models. Ad- Generality increases at each stage because it is vances have been enabled by progress in learning al- possible to have the machine execute a wider range gorithms (particularly using deep neural networks),8 of tasks. For example, in classical programming, continuing gains in computer power and massive data hardware can be instructed by software to perform availability (made possible with the growth of the in- different tasks in a prespecified domain but can- ternet, the growing digitalization of services and relat- not adapt to different domains. That is, we can use ed records, and the emergence of digital platforms). a spreadsheet to achieve many numerical tasks, but Perhaps one of the most pervasive and impactful it would be of little use as a word processor. Cur- applications of AI in today’s world is associated with rent large language models have higher generality recommending what digital content to access and because they can handle tasks ranging from writ- interact with—or which products to buy—on digital ing text to computer coding and beyond.14 And the platforms. AI-based recommendations using rec- human effort required to have machines execute ommender systems (chapter 5) are already part of those tasks declines in more-advanced stages, as many people’s lives. Their diffusion parallels a range with computer coding. From the weeks it could of changes for individuals (for example, increases in take early computers do a different operation, the illbeing for young people) and for society.9 They are high-level programming languages increased gen- also associated with the potential to trap users into erality and reduced effort for basic programming using social media, for fear of missing out, even if tasks with classical programming. And large lan- many people would rather live in a world without guage models now generate computer code from such platforms.10 Deep learning applications started spoken or written language descriptions in more and to emerge as the dominant form of machine learning more languages.15 Putting generality and human ef- around 2010,11 so it is remarkable that this specific fort as two axes shows computational machines as a application has already transformed people’s individ- path in which machines can do more things with less ual, social and political lives. effort (figure S1.2.1). The fourth stage in the evolution of computation Where do we go from here beyond generative AI? machines corresponds to generative AI, enabled once Nobody knows. Experts have different views. Some again by breakthroughs in algorithms, including the see the recent models continuing to evolve with- transformer architecture,12 along with training not on in the current machine learning paradigm, acquir- data associated with a specific task but on the vast re- ing ever more capabilities, to the point of posing pository of data in the form of text, images, sound and many risks, potentially existential ones.16 Others see video on the whole of the internet and beyond. Train- the current path as inherently limited, an off-ramp ing has been powered by faster and more powerful that demands new paradigms for progress to con- computing enabled by graphical processing units.13 tinue.17 Still others think that machine learning is 40 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure S1.2.1 A human development interpretation of the evolution of computational machines—more tasks helpful to humans with less effort Generality (tasks helpful to humans executed by the machine) Artificial general intelligence Asymptotic limit when any task up to the humanity boundary can be machine executed with minimum human effort ? ? One prompt for each task (large language models/large multimodal models/agents) ? One training set for each task (machine learning) One software for each task (Turing machines) One hardware for each task (pre–Turing machines) Humanity boundary comprising tasks (such as art) that society values only if executed by people for a machine to execute a task) Source: Human Development Report Office. both inherently limited and potentially dangerous.18 without ever touching it.23 That humanity-deter- Many are questioning whether the pursuit of hu- mined boundary corresponds to the point when any man-level intelligence is what should be driving AI task can be executed by machine with minimum research19—and even what that would mean is con- human effort, except tasks that are valued only when tentious (box S1.2.1). executed by humans. The boundary is not fixed and Although there is no agreed definition of what ar- can evolve as processes of individual and public rea- tificial general intelligence is or even means,20 there soning shape social norms and values. Where could are numerous benchmarks based on different defini- be the boundary be? In one extreme it could be as tions that assess the extent to which progress to wards close to zero as possible—or even at zero. An econ- that goal is being made (one example is the Abstract omy that reaches this singularity is theoretically pos- and Reasoning Corpus for Artificial General Intel- sible and can be modelled as a coherent economic ligence, which also describes several other bench- framework with no (economically valuable) tasks marks: https://arcprize.org/; another is the so-called for people to do.24 But that would be a choice, not human ity last exam: https://agi.safe.ai/). Even what something inevitable given the march of technolo- intelligence is or means is contentious.21 Though gy. In another extreme, society may determine that there are debates as to whether artificial general in- the pursuit of artificial general intelligence should telligence is even possible,22 the human develop ment stop, not because of the fear of the unknown (as with interpretation proposed here presents a novel per- existential risk)25 but because of an affirmation of spective on what the pursuit of artificial general intel- a positive act of agency, determining that there are ligence means. enough tasks done by machines based on an evalua- Artificial general intelligence is interpreted here tion of the things that people value and have reason as a boundary that we can approach indefinitely to value. CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 41 Box S1.2.1 Human intelligence is not defined by that of a single human but of many: Could artificial intelligence get there? The breadth of tasks for which artificial intelligence (AI) can exceed the performance of even talented individuals is rapidly increasing, resulting in speculation that AI will soon do so at all tasks humans complete.1 This, in turn, leads to hope and concerns about a forthcoming artificial general intelligence singularity wherein AI surpasses and obviates the need for human intelligence, a key stated goal of several large AI firms.2 Yet even if a given AI can beat any human at any task, exceeding and replacing human intelligence will remain far beyond the horizon. Although this may seem counterintuitive, the distance arises from the fact that collective human intelligence far exceeds what individuals can accomplish alone.3 In one famous early 20th century example, individual fairgoers’ estimates of the weight of an ox varied widely and tended to be quite poor, yet the average estimate was within 1 percent of the true value.4 In more applied contexts small groups of radiologists can do far better than even the best individual radiologist.5 AI performance at this task, and others, will often fall far short of what humans accomplish collectively. And while it may seem that the solution is simply to create collective artificial general intelligence, science in the intervening century has revealed why this is unlikely to work. Collective intelligence manifests not from large numbers but from complex interactions between the structure of our social networks;6 our diverse agency and capabilities;7 our active capacity to inhabit, probe and sense the physical world; and the cumulative accumulation of culture over millennia. Even ostensible human limitations, such as our finite capacity for maintaining social relationships, appear to be features—not bugs—of collective intelligence.8 By analogy to AI, collective intelligence arises through an evo- lutionarily adapted network of every human that has ever lived, each possessing a unique and constantly updating training set, prompts and alignment. A single model that exceeds humans on individual tasks, even all of them, is still no match for collective intelligence. The question then becomes when and how AI can augment human intelligence more broadly. For the reasons outlined in this chapter, replacing humans even with very advanced AI is unlikely to be ideal for promoting collective intelligence. No AI on the horizon will possess humans’ capacity to diversely, curiously, continuously and actively explore the physical world and share the information gleaned with others through finely tuned social networks that produce emergent human intelligence. Rather than awaiting such an AI, we can instead rely on existing technology to augment individual humans in their pursuits—leveraging the existing, multibillion-member human superintelligence we already have and depend on. Notes 1. Narayanan and Kapoor 2024b. 2. Becker 2024. 3. Riedl and others 2021; Surowiecki 2005. 4. Galton 1907. 5. Wolf and others 2015. 6. Becker, Brackbill and Centola 2017; Becker, Porter and Centola 2019; Mann 2021. 7. Navajas and others 2018; Pescetelli, Rutherford and Rahwan 2020. 8. Henrich 2015. 42 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 NOTES 1. Reid-Green 1989. 13. In addition to transformer architecture, other core deep learning gen- erative approaches include generative adversarial networks, variational 2. https://www.britannica.com/technology/Colossus-computer autoencoders and latent diffusion models (Banh and Strobel 2023). 3. Turing 1937. 14. Quantifying greater generality may even become possible given ongoing 4. This brief description also glosses over many details (for example, the transi- efforts to quantify the retention performance of large language models tion from instructions fed to the computer that were encoded mechanically when applied to novel tasks that they are not specifically trained for in punch cards to symbolically encoded computer programs, which was (Maslej and others 2023; Minaee and others 2024; Z. Zhang, Lee and oth- itself a major breakthrough). It ignores the huge human effort that went into ers 2024; Z. Zhang and others 2025). For example, one metric found that the transition from pre–Turing machines to Turing machines. For example, top-performing large language models achieved 50 percent performance the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer, often referred to as one on novel tasks (Srivastava and others 2022). of the first general-purpose computers, was not a Turing machine but was 15. Recent evidence has found that pairing computer coders with AI made Turing capable in the sense that it was able to execute any computation that them code 55 percent faster and that 85 percent felt more confident in could be described by an algorithm (high generality). But it required huge their code quality (Gao and Research 2024). human effort involving physical rewiring for each calculation, with setup times that could extend to weeks (Haigh, Priestley and Rope 2016). 16. Bengio and others 2024; Bengio and others 2025; Cohen and others 2024. 5. Browne 1988. 17. Browning and LeCun 2022. 6. US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine 2024. 18. Marcus 2024. 7. Deng and others 2009; Russakovsky and others 2015. 19. N. Jones 2025. 8. LeCun, Bengio and Hinton 2015. 20. Mitch ell 2024a. 9. For a discussion of the broad societal implications of the pervasive use of 21. Edito rial 2024. AI algorithms having power over people’s lives, see Lazar (2024a, 2024b, 22. Fjelland 2020. 2024d). 23. More formally, this would correspond to an asymptotic limit. 10. Bursztyn and others 2023. 24. Nordhaus 2021. 11. Mitchell 2021. 25. https://futureoflife.org/open-letter/pause-giant-ai-experiments/. 12. Vaswani and others 2017; Yenduri and others 2024. CHAPTER 1 — EMPOWERING PEOPLE TO MAKE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE WORK FOR HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 43 CHAPTER 2 From tools to agents: Rewiring artificial intelligence to promote human development 45 CHAPTER 2 From tools to agents: Rewiring artificial intelligence to promote human development To artificial intelligence (AI), decisions are merely tasks to automate. Yet to humans, choice is the currency of agency and the affordance of freedom. As AI becomes integrated into our world, it raises the possibility of automating tedious decisions alongside the specter of inadvertently ceding human agency. The consequences of carelessly ceding agency will be felt not just by individuals in moments but through cumulative consequences for collectives and cultures. Averting loss of human agency to machines requires going beyond a quest for more agentic models and instead favouring development of AI that expands, rather than contracts, human choice, agency and freedoms. 46 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 From doing what we do to the newfound abilities of AI and the breadth of its choosing what we choose deployment.3 This tectonic shift in how digital technologies in- A nearly identical ranking algorithm will just as read- teract with agency comes at a time when agency itself ily decide the next song on a playlist as it will the next faces challenges globally. The 2023/2024 Human target of an autonomous weapon. Twin decisions and Development Report noted that nearly half of peo- their associated actions, which scarcely belong in the ple worldwide reported not being in control of their same sentence, are virtually identical from the per- own lives.4 Our survey on AI sentiments echoed those spective of artificial intelligence (AI) deputized to au- findings and asked participants how they felt about tomate them. Although it is easy to fixate on the moral their agency looking forward to an AI-shaped future. distinction between these two contexts, a closer look The results suggest a gap has emerged, whereby low, reveals a shared feature of AI across both contexts— medium and high Human Development Index (HDI) human decisions become mere tasks to automate. countries anticipate few changes in agency, whereas Whereas chapter 1 examines the step-change very high HDI countries expect a loss of agency (fig- in how machines have broadened their ability to ure 2.1). Although the causes of this gap remain un- do what we do, this chapter considers their new- clear, one possibility is that increased exposure to found ability to choose what we choose. Although AI in very high HDI countries is associated with the step-changes in the ease with which novel tasks sense that the future will be one in which lesser agen- can be delegated to machines have historical par- cy is enjoyed. allels, the same cannot be said for AI’s newfound decisionmaking capabilities. From 19th century vote Figure 2.1 Sense of agency now and in an artificial tabulating to classical programming, the construc- intelligence (AI)–defined future tion of the machines themselves has historically been imbued with human decisions. In sharp contrast AI (% of population) is routinely constructed through machine learning— asking AI to make decisions and providing feedback 56.5 57.5 on those choices. The net result is machines that, by 44.6 45.8 45.4 construction, are decisionmaking machines.1 This feature of modern machines cannot be ignored 32.1 because the choices we make express our agency, while the suite of options available to us defines our freedoms.2 Our agency manifests in why we choose what we choose, something AI cannot possibly know because it can observe only our actions not our pref- erences. Given this, AI can automate our choices but Low/medium High Very high cannot reliably do so in a way that fully reflects our Human Development Index group goals, values, preferences and needs (chapter 5). In the human development approach expanding High current control over own life today High expected control over own life in five years, freedom and agency is not merely a goal but the prin- as AI evolves cipal means through which human development is achieved. When AI restricts the choices we are free to make or reduces our agency to do so, it works di- Note: Based on pooled data for 21 countries. The sense of agency is proxied by the percentage of respondents reporting high perceived control over their own rectly against human development. But when AI lives. High current control refers to responses of 8–10 on a 10 point scale to the provides a broader swath of more informed choices, question “How much freedom of choice and control do you feel you have over the way your life turns out?” High expected control in five years, as AI evolves, it can amplify our freedom and agency. As such, the refers to responses of 8–10 on a 10 point scale to the question “How much free- human development impact of creating machines dom of choice and control do you think you’ll have in five years, as digital tech- nologies, including artificial intelligence, become more integrated into daily life?” that can decide for us is difficult to overstate, can- Source: Human Development Report Office based on data from the United not be neutral and scales multiplicatively with both Nations Development Programme Survey on AI and Human Development. CHAPTER 2 — FROM TOOLS TO AGENTS: REWIRING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO PROMOTE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 47 Whether AI erodes agency depends on how it is balance—carrying a backpack or leaving the house designed and implemented. Critically, human agen- at night—what agency and freedoms could we pos- cy and freedom are not the simple sum of choices we sibly enjoy? These are not abstract hypotheticals but make; nor are they zero-sum in the sense that ceding real-world consequences of deputizing machines to a choice to AI is losing agency. We may often require make such consequential decisions. decisions to be reached or tasks to be accomplished Herein lies the crux of this chapter: we should not merely to support more agency-defining choices and task machines with decisions simply because they actions. For example, few of us can be bothered to now seem capable of making them; we should in- pore over raw weather data and decide the probabil- stead do so based on whether ceding those decisions ity of rain, but such information may be invaluable in expands or contracts our agency and freedoms (fig- supporting our choices—from bringing an umbrella ure 2.2). In this sense, human development provides to raising crops. In delegating such a decision to ma- a lens for evaluating the use, design, deployment and chines, we expand our own agency in the choices we regulation of AI that enables us to see the value of a choose to make. system as situated in the real world and beyond its By the same token none of us wishes for a machine technical capacity. This framing requires letting go to decide irrevocably in an instant whether we are a of techno-solutionist narratives (chapter 4). In doing combatant or civilian under the Geneva Conven- so, we may find that existing technologies—not hypo- tions. The unfreedoms created by a decisionmaking thetical future artificial general intelligence—are best machine quantifying our behaviour to opaquely suited to improve agency in a given context. make such a choice are difficult to overstate. Be- The decisionmaking nature of AI, particularly in cause we cannot know which actions will tip the combination with its newfound language skills, has Figure 2.2 Simpler forms of artificial intelligence (AI) may more easily promote human agency, whereas AI with high agenticity can have a broader range of more dramatic impacts Human agency– enhancing Weather prediction Advanced driver assistance systems Conversational ranking algorithms Spellcheck Tools Agentic models Engagement- based ranking AI job interviews Human Fully agency– autonomous degrading weapons Source: Human Development Report Office. 48 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 bestowed on it a remarkable capacity to weave itself move forward. How could we possibly predict, much into our social fabric. We interact one-on-one with a less intervene on such a large scale, amorphous im- menagerie of AI, from simple autocorrect and smart pacts that may play out over timescales longer than thermostats to generative chatbots and digital assis- our own lives? Yet the challenge here is, in a sense, no tants. AI has also become an intermediary between different in scale or complexity than the challenges of humans: ranking, sorting, filtering and translating human development more broadly. The chapter ends conversations at unfathomable scales. Increasingly, where it starts, arguing that even against such com- AI is becoming embedded into human institutions plexity the human development approach can light a as well, shaping their decisions and actions, with cas- path forward—designing, regulating and leveraging cading consequences for large swaths of the popula- AI in ways that scaffold human agency and expand tion and beyond the digital divide, as discussed later freedoms. in the chapter. Entering a brave new (digital) world “ Flows of information through human networks shape the decisions we make The human development perspective is anchored in collectively, from juries, electorates and Amartya Sen’s view that expanding freedom is both governments to globally coordinated efforts to the primary end and the principal means of develop- address climate change. Because AI is now a ment.9 In Sen’s view freedom encompasses individ- feature of these networks, it will undoubtedly uals’ capabilities and agency—the options afforded have effects on these emergent decisions to them and their empowerment to freely leverage those options to pursue goals based on their values Perhaps the most impactful consequences of AI and needs. Echoing Sen, the 2001 Human Develop- derive from embedding it in our social systems. So ment Report described technology as a tool for, not much of human development depends on these just a reward of, growth and development.10 A quarter human networks, which are often key determinates century later it is difficult to overstate the internet’s of our capabilities, functioning, agency and free- impact on shaping and defining the freedoms we doms.5 Flows of information through these networks enjoy and, by extension, human development. These shape the decisions we make collectively, from juries, freedoms are altered not only through direct connec- electorates and governments to globally coordinated tion but also through disparity in connection—the efforts to address climate change.6 Because AI is now digitization of infrastructure, institutions and econ- a feature of these networks, it will undoubtedly have omies and the spillover effects to other facets of our effects on these emergent decisions.7 physical, social and natural worlds. On longer timescales the cumulative product of The internet, having already reshaped human de- choices made and remembered defines who we are as velopment, recently entered a major transition from groups of people, our culture.8 Because AI makes—and a repository of largely passive digital tools to a sys- helps us make—decisions, it will undoubtedly have— tem replete with a menagerie of artificial intelligenc- and arguably already has had—effects on the trajec- es. The pace of this change has been staggering, with tories of human culture. Will it be expansive, enabling technologies that just a few short years ago represent- contextual innovation and broadening our culture? Or ed science fiction now being integrated into nearly contractive, narrowing the breadth of global culture every corner of the internet and our devices. Data, towards a photocopy of the culture that happened to long a valuable resource, are scraped and hoarded be represented on the internet when training sets were by the petabyte. Massive financial investment has collected? The chapter concludes by highlighting the flowed into entirely new markets, promising trans- importance of considering AI’s impacts across these formation. The scale of investment into these tech- larger scales of society and time, as they will invariably nologies follows promises that AI will redefine and shape human development in profound ways. reshape our economies, education systems, health Against the complexity unravelled in this chapter, services and the world more broadly. Even if only it can feel daunting to know where to start and how to a fraction of these promises come to fruition, we CHAPTER 2 — FROM TOOLS TO AGENTS: REWIRING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO PROMOTE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 49 should expect large-scale impacts of AI on human versions of tools in the physical world—for example, development.11 email, online banking, calendars and digital encyclo- But what will these impacts be? There has been paedias. From the human development perspective no shortage of attempts to predict, manage or gauge tools in the digital world resemble tools in the phys- AI’s impact across domains. Estimates range from a ical one (table 2.1). Tools have well-defined purpos- mere bump in the road to global catastrophe—from es that can be understood and taught. Human action modest improvements to a brave new world—with predictably links to outcomes, and this relationship most falling somewhere in between. Yet predicting remains stable over time unless the tool’s design is downstream consequences rests on a narrative that intentionally changed. Perhaps most important from technology is something that happens to human- the human development perspective, tools do not ity. It belies the fact that our choices—particular- choose things for us—keeping human agency front ly in the coming years—will determine what those and centre. impacts are and, ultimately, what they mean for As chapter 1 discusses, AI represents the latest human development. But this ambiguity indicates step-change in our ability to create machines capable plasticity—the freedom to choose what our AI-in- of accomplishing ever more general tasks. Particular- fused internet looks like before it ossifies. In this ly when developed through machine learning, AI is sense what AI becomes is not merely a determinant implicitly decisionmaking machines—even when the of human development but a manifestation of it. decisions are as trivial as spellchecking. In this sense the simplest forms of AI bear much resemblance, from the user’s perspective, to tools. The decisions From tools to agents they make are inconsequential or predictable enough to simply save us time (spellchecking, smart thermo- The 2001 Human Development Report’s emphasis stats), or they reliably make accurate decisions we on technology as a tool for development recognized could not make (weather prediction, translation). the early internet’s promise for expanding agency Yet more advanced forms of machine learning and capabilities with an ever-evolving suite of digital converse, generate videos, play games and identi- tools.12 fy candidate drugs (box 2.1). This general breadth Consistent with this, efforts in the intervening dec- of task completion comes alongside expanded ades have emphasized equitable distribution of dig- decisionmaking. In this sense the capabilities and ital tools through closing the digital divide. See, for nature of these systems bear little resemblance to example, the increase in the share of the world’s pop- tools. A tool provides an individual with well-de- ulation with access to the internet from 16.8 percent fined affordances that they can learn to use, resulting in 2001 to 67 percent in 2023.13 While the prolifera- tion of access to the internet has been remarkable, wide disparities remain in quality, reliability and Table 2.1 Comparing characteristics of digital tools means of connecting.14 Moreover, the capabilities and artificial intelligence (AI) agents that connecting to the internet provide vary widely Feature Digital tools AI agents and are linked to the key components of the HDI: in- Predictability Consistent and Often come and achievements in education and in health. predictable unpredictable Connecting to the internet remains an important de- Transparency Easy to understand Opaque, difficult to velopment priority because it can enable individu- and explain interpret als to access and contribute to the global knowledge Behaviour Static, unchanged Dynamic, evolves unless updated over time commons and participate in the ever-growing digital economy. Role Passive, user- Active, can act driven autonomously The tool-like quality of early digital technolo- gies undergirded their promise as a force for de- Note: These are not absolutes but ends of a spectrum. A given implementation of AI may behave more like a tool in one or more velopment. Many tools on the early internet were ways, but AI is unique in its ability to exist along these continua. simply more equitably distributable or more efficient Source: Human Development Report Office. 50 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Box 2.1 Artificial intelligence revolutionizing biomedicine Generative artificial intelligence (AI) has the potential to generate much more than text, images and video, and there is substantial interest in applying AI to biomedical research and development. Two active intertwined areas of research surround protein folding and drug discovery. Proteins are large molecules synthesized within cells from amino acids that serve various functions and are common targets of medicines intended to treat disease. Discerning their three-dimensional shape is essential for understanding their function and developing drugs that target specific proteins. More recently, mRNA vaccines have made it possible to encourage cells to generate proteins not found in their genetic code, with promising applications for allergies, infectious diseases, cancer and genetic disorders. Unfortunately, computing the structure of a given protein has historically been computationally intensive, requiring access to larger servers or distributed computing efforts such as Folding@home.1 Recent advances in AI, such as AlphaFold3, can predict the structure of proteins at drastically reduced computational cost with increasingly high accuracy.2 Challenges of protein folding are intrinsically linked to AI-powered drug discovery, which seeks to identify compounds that often interact with proteins, such as receptors or enzymes, to produce some desired biological effect. Ideally, the compounds already exist and are approved for treating other conditions. AI applications for drug development are on the rise because they can rapidly propose and assess candidate drugs, potentially speeding discovery and aiding in identifying promising candidates. AI can be further used to de- velop pathways for drug synthesis or to speed up testing of proposed drugs. Investment in AI-fuelled drug discovery is ramping up, with the first AI-discovered drugs hitting the market in 2024.3 Although the use of AI in medicine is nascent, there is little doubt that it has big potential to advance the field in the coming years. Key challenges remain in making these technologies more widely accessible so that research and development can be expanded beyond a finite set of for-profit institutions and well-funded universities. One such effort, ColabFold, was developed in 2022.4 This free and accessible protein folding platform provides better functionality than Google’s last-generation AlphaFold2, making it a viable option for some protein folding tasks. Investment in open-source AI models for biomedical research may be critical for expanding biomedical research and development leveraging these tools. Notes 1. Larson and others 2009; Voelz, Pande and Bowman 2023. 2. Abramson and others 2024. 3. Ren and others 2024. 4. Mirdita and others 2022. in a specific expansion of capabilities—importantly, what extent would we choose to spend time reading it makes no choices for us. By contrast, an AI-based low-quality information, given the choice? Would system may behave differently across users and con- we choose to have our views reinforced by such low- texts, in essence adapting its behaviour to context. quality information or prefer to engage with some- This challenge is particularly salient in personalized thing closer to the truth? These decisions may be recommender systems, where two individuals in dif- silently made for us in an instant, beyond our view. ferent locations who conduct the same web search re- This unpredictable nature of AI raises a host of ad- ceive very different results.15 ditional development challenges at scale, as the same This dynamic feature of AI-powered systems can system may result in very different outcomes across be valuable. For example, it can provide locally tai- individuals, contexts and time. The differing out- lored information and avoid irrelevant information comes may, in turn, exacerbate existing inequalities. dominating search results. In this sense the choice to For example, some users may receive higher quality return only locally relevant results is one we might re- information from the same search product merely liably make ourselves—such as choosing to examine because of their geographic location or other aspects. results only in a language we speak. However, per- In this sense deprivations of agency-impactful choic- sonalization can also have varied impacts on the qual- es may not be uniform. ity of items surfaced across platforms, from surfacing Similarly, the function of more straightforward less-divisive, higher quality information to the op- digital tools can be inferred by evaluating the posite: amplifying misleading, ideologically aligned underlying code. One could browse the code pow- content.16 Here, the choice is more consequential—to ering a simple email service and deduce that it CHAPTER 2 — FROM TOOLS TO AGENTS: REWIRING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO PROMOTE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 51 enables individuals to send one another messag- decisions. Autonomy here is defined not by the tool es. This functionality can be taught to users, pro- itself but by the degree to which (if any) judges’ de- moting agency when deciding whether and how cisions are constrained by law, norm or convenience to use email. Reading the code underlying gener- to follow the algorithmic recommendations. In other ative AI, one could infer that it learns something cases AI systems will be explicitly designed to initi- from some data and produces responses. Yet there ate actions or make decisions (semi-)autonomous- is no way to trivially evaluate the trillions of poten- ly in response to changes or incoming information. tial parameters and petabytes of data that define Automated trading systems, for example, can move what it learned and how it might respond. The re- money in response to market changes, exerting sultant opacity makes it difficult to know why more substantial force on financial markets, with mini- complex AI systems choose what they choose and mal, if any, human oversight.20 Automation raises whether their choices reflect the choices we would challenges when choices have meaningful conse- make. Indeed, it may even be hard to know which quences, because the impacts of decisions can ac- intermediate choices they made before arriving at a cumulate without human oversight—fully divorced result or decision. from human agency. “ The resultant opacity makes it difficult to know why more complex AI systems Making AI explain itself choose what they choose and whether their choices reflect the choices we would make The unpredictability of AI agents has been a criti- cal challenge to their deployment in real-world con- Many AI systems are not simply trained once but texts. AI agents can behave dynamically, actively and are instead refined with data and experience.17 As a autonomously, leading to the alignment problem, result, even if the behaviour is well-characterized, it identified more than half a century ago by computer may change over time, perhaps suddenly and silent- scientist Norbert Wiener.21 The behaviour of an AI ly, rendering our understanding of impacts and any system is often shaped implicitly through learning implemented interventions obsolete.18 Moreover, the specific tasks in a controlled environment. On de- development of AI is progressing at a speed far out- ployment the system may be used for a much wider pacing what can be expected for scientific and reg- variety of tasks across a broader range of outcomes, ulatory responses, frustrating typical approaches to leading to unpredictable behaviour. identifying and mitigating harm. This dynamic na- Yet the predictability, explainability and general dy- ture of systems makes AI technologies a moving tar- namism of an AI system are not discrete states—they get such that any development-minded applications represent continua along which a given implementa- will require continuous reappraisal as the systems tion of AI sits and can be adjusted. Anticipating risks, evolve and alter their behaviour. From an individual’s promoting human agency and ensuring accountabili- perspective, even if they are comfortable delegating ty can be facilitated by intentionally designing AI so choices to a machine at a particular moment in time, that humans can inspect and understand how they they may have no way of knowing whether and when work.22 Often referred to as explainable AI or ex- that machine begins making different choices that no plainable machine learning, these systems promote longer reflect their agency. human intellectual oversight of AI by ensuring that This decisionmaking capacity is made even more humans can understand why inputs to a given AI sys- salient when AI can act on its choices. Some AI sys- tem result in a specific output. tems are, like tools, passive and require human input Not all applications and approaches to AI are to produce output or have meaningful impacts. Soft- amenable to explainability. For those that are not, ware that judges use to predict recidivism requires AI audits hold promise for characterizing how an AI inputting characteristics of the person being evalu- system functions, its risks, biases and other relevant ated for release.19 While it can make recommenda- factors (chapter 5).23 Audits may reveal the need tions, judges ultimately bear responsibility for any for refinement and reshaping before deployment. 52 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Shaping alignment can take various forms, often “ Whether highly agentic systems ultimately involving further AI training through feedback promote or degrade human development depends from other AI, through explicit heuristics and con- not on their technological capabilities but on straints or through “humans-in-the-loop.”24 Each the way they are integrated into society—a of these methods is an imperfect iterative process theme explored throughout this Report that may require continual and ongoing shaping as the behaviour of AI, its uses, its users or the con- There is no trivial or zero-sum relationship be- text in which it is deployed change. In some cases tween the agenticity of AI and its impacts on human it may be necessary to restrict AI technologies that development. AI systems with low agenticity can, and cannot reasonably or sufficiently align with human routinely do, dramatically improve human agency. wellbeing. Weather prediction, for example, is far from auton- omously able to take broad-ranging action—but can provide individuals with essential information to sup- AI’s ability to do and choose does not give it agency port agency. These systems provide critical informa- tion for making decisions as mundane as bringing an Were it just for the unpredictability of AI systems, ef- umbrella and as consequential as crop management, forts to rein in and characterize AI behaviour could city planning and emergency evacuation. Weath- be sufficient for making systems tool-like. Yet the er prediction systems could be made more agentic, unique decisionmaking and action-taking capabil- sending automated tailored messages and answering ities of some AI systems fundamentally change the questions in regular spoken language, automatical- calculus of AI from a human development perspec- ly translating as needed. Provided these systems are tive. The degree to which AI systems can autono- trusted and accurate, their anticipated consequences mously accomplish a range of more general tasks for human agency would be net positive. is often referred to as agenticity—a nod to their ca- Yet the same underlying generative language pacity to act as agents. AI systems with low agentic- model leveraged to support disaster communication ity may narrowly serve simple functions with heavy could be purposed to create deceptive bots or write human oversight (see figure 2.2). More complex misleading news articles that persuade individuals forms of AI, such as modern chatbots, can be repur- to make decisions against their interests and values. posed for a wide range of tasks they can undertake Even more consequential uses of highly agentic sys- with whatever degree of autonomy is afforded to tems have begun to occur on battlefields. Some ex- them. The race to build more and more capable amples of AI demonstrate how highly agentic models models is implicitly a race to develop more agentic convey both greater opportunities and greater risks forms of AI. for human development (see figure 2.2). Whether Techno-solutionist narratives, explored in chap- these highly agentic systems ultimately promote or ter 4, often suggest that simply building more agen- degrade human development depends not on their tic models can solve the world’s problems. Yet the technological capabilities but on the way they are in- human development lens provides a starkly con- tegrated into society—a theme explored throughout trasting view. Because our own human agency is ex- this Report. pressed through actions and decisions, AI’s agentic Given the centrality of agency in the human de- capabilities hold promise to expand our ability to velopment framing, it is important to remain aware make and act on choices, alongside a very real risk of distinctions between human agency and machine of ceding human agency to technological artifacts. agenticity. There is no reason to believe that because Developments in the past two years have drastical- AI can make and act on decisions, it does so using sim- ly increased the agenticity of AI, commensurately ilar (or any) cognitive processes to those of humans.25 broadening the ways it intersects with human agen- Nor does framing AI as agents or agentic imply that we cy (see figure 2.2). Whether this increased agenticity should strive for machines with humanlike agency. In- improves or degrades human agency depends on the stead, we must anchor our choices for developing and choices we make in the coming years. deploying AI in ways that expand human agency and CHAPTER 2 — FROM TOOLS TO AGENTS: REWIRING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO PROMOTE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 53 capabilities. These technologies must be designed so interactions facilitate social mobility, promote men- that whatever decisionmaking we cede to AI comple- tal and physical health, increase longevity and are ments and expands rather than contracts freedom. AI essential to a good life.31 More generally, our social technologies should be viewed not as tools of human institutions and interactions shape our skills, inform development but as agents whose behaviour, align- our decisions and alter our opportunities—crucial de- ment, training and use can profoundly impact human terminants of human development.32 Much of the de- development and security. Ultimately, agenticity is velopment potential of the internet lies in its capacity not a goal but a design choice to be made solely when to augment interactions between humans, reducing it supports human agency (chapter 5). geographical, infrastructural and systemic barriers to Approaches to ensuring AI accountability and re- communicating while increasing the ability to share ducing uncertainty are rapidly evolving and will and access information. doubtless continue to do so, given the rapid pace of change in AI functionality and deployment.26 At pres- “ By inviting machines into our social ent, there is minimal accounting of the harms caused networks, the choices they make begin to by AI and, similarly, minimal visibility on how it is impact us through our social networks in much being deployed and used. the same ways that we impact one another Embedding AI into our social fabric The proliferation of AI in the digital spaces we in- creasingly inhabit presents a qualitative shift in how we interact with one another and the physical world. Online connections between humans As outlined below, social networks now comprise di- rect interactions between humans and AI, AI-medi- The printing press, radio and television increased the ated interactions between humans and an increasing flow of information between humans, but the internet but largely unappreciated impact of interactions be- has been distinct in reducing the costs of producing tween AI systems (figure 2.3). This in turn shapes the and distributing information.27 Analogue technolo- choices we can and do make, as individuals and as gies tended to consolidate the production and distri- groups. Moreover, by inviting machines into our so- bution of information in the hands of those with the cial networks, the choices they make begin to impact infrastructure for distribution. These few-to-many us through our social networks in much the same communication systems—often still geographically ways that we impact one another. The following sec- constrained—fundamentally differ from the global tions evaluate how integrating our social systems with all-to-all systems afforded by internet connectivity. decisionmaking machines can profoundly influence Connections between humans are in many ways the choices and their consequences, from the scale of in- primary source of both opportunities and challeng- dividuals in day-to-day life through societal processes es to improve human development. The 2023/2024 that take place over generations. Human Development Report evaluated some critical barriers to successful human collaboration, the rise of gridlock and what can be done to prevent it.28 Histor- Interactions between humans and AI ically, the successes, failures, inequalities and many development challenges have emerged directly or in- Regardless of whether we notice, we increasingly in- directly from the dynamics of interactions between teract with, and cede choices to, various forms of AI. humans.29 Ultimately, the challenge of guiding our AI in some form is required to filter, sort and display world towards one that is sustainable, equitable and the vast amount of information on the internet in a healthy is a challenge of understanding how to pro- form that our finite attention can process (chapter 5). mote successful interaction between humans.30 In more conspicuous cases we find ourselves con- At more minor scales than global decisionmaking, versing with automated systems in customer service it is difficult to overstate the importance and ben- agents, digital assistants and multipurpose chatbots. efits of communication between humans. Social Leveraging these explicit cases of interaction between 54 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure 2.3 Interactions between and among humans and artificial intelligence v C o h i c a s e t m b a a o s r t s t s i , d s t e a v n i c ts es p e h m F o a a n c i e l e - c to a - ll f s a c e , Social media, translation tools, recommendation systems m e ta -l t e r a a a T lg d r h n o i i n n r g i g t , h s I n m d te i e c r v n i e c e t s o , f in g Source: Human Development Report Office based on Brinkmann and others (2023). humans and AI is an area of considerable ongoing re- action such as braking to avoid collision.35 These sys- search and development across domains. In medicine tems could reduce common types of traffic accidents accurate diagnoses are essential to effective treat- by 16–40 percent.36 With more than a million traffic ment, and diagnostic accuracy directly affects human deaths a year globally, reductions in accidents from ex- development. Numerous AI systems are being de- panded access to advanced driver assistance systems veloped daily to improve diagnostic capabilities. For could directly improve life expectancy and, by exten- instance, endoscopists codiagnosing alongside AI re- sion, human development.37 Because traffic deaths are sulted in higher diagnostic performance than either considerably more prevalent in low HDI countries, im- AI or humans acting alone.33 Other applications of proving access to these systems could be particularly explicit interaction between humans and AI are being promising.38 But cultural differences in moral apprais- developed in contexts as varied as addressing erro- al of advanced driver assistance systems may require neous beliefs; getting information about government adapting them to local norms and values.39 services; providing financial, legal and medical ad- Interactions between humans and AI can also fa- vice; counselling; and developing software.34 cilitate learning for both. For example, AI-powered Sometimes, human–AI interaction can be more sub- identification of bird species can enable users to tle, augmenting capabilities in ways that feel much better identify them in the future.40 The increased more like using a tool than holding a conversation. For ability to identify species can, in turn, improve AI’s example, advanced driver assistance systems in vehi- performance by directly contributing geolocated ob- cles encompass a range of technologies that leverage servations and uploading labelled sounds and imag- the high sensitivity of digital sensors to warn driv- es. This recursive process and the data it generates ers of hazards, detect and offset fatigue and initiate have become an essential tool for conservation.41 CHAPTER 2 — FROM TOOLS TO AGENTS: REWIRING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO PROMOTE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 55 Well-designed AI can thus leverage humans’ unique AI has been leveraged to smooth otherwise polarizing capabilities to explore the world and augment them conversations—helping establish common ground.46 with the effortless ways computers can store and pro- cess information. And such systems can be aligned “ AI’s ability to process natural language opens to benefit individuals and broader development the possibility of accessing and generating digital goals. These examples are just a handful of the many information even if one cannot read or write. This ways AI can enhance individual capabilities, a theme potential to broaden accessibility is particularly throughout the Report in contexts such as education, relevant to development, as it can help in healthcare and employment. overcoming barriers to accessing the benefits of Now consider the pitfalls. Many of the freedoms our digital world for those previously limited by and capabilities the internet provides depend on ex- design that makes implicit assumptions about panding access to high-quality information. One of their abilities, literacy and language fluencies the more common ways humans engage with AI is through various recommender systems that sort and Beyond language AI can be used in various ways to filter news, information and entertainment across the smooth communication between humans. Informa- web. Often aligned for engagement and advertising tion shared in one format, such as text and images, sales, these systems can narrow information diver- can be converted to audio and descriptions of images sity, heighten confirmation bias, promote addictive for consumption by someone else. Similarly, AI’s abil- behaviours and lead individuals down “rabbit holes” ity to process natural language opens the possibility and into harmful behaviour (chapters 3 and 5).42 The of accessing and generating digital information even same image recognition technology enabling visual if one cannot read or write. This potential to broaden forms of search powers facial recognition software accessibility is particularly relevant to development, used to restrict freedoms and harass.43 Ultimately, the as it can help in overcoming barriers to accessing the extent to which such systems exhibit these freedom- benefits of our digital world for those previously lim- and capability-limiting effects depends inherently on ited by design that makes implicit assumptions about whether they are designed in a way that keeps human their abilities, literacy and language fluencies. agency and freedoms front and centre. When AI facilitates conversation between two in- dividuals, it may be clear there is an AI intermedi- ary—or it may not be. The impact of AI may be subtle AI-mediated human interaction or unknown to users. For example, much of what we encounter online may be created by humans but ul- AI intermediaries increasingly facilitate or alter in- timately curated and ranked by machine learning. teractions between humans. In simple cases AI can Given the vast amount of information online, some convert information generated by one human into a form of curation is inevitable, and AI condenses large format that another can more easily receive. For ex- volumes of information into a form that is readable by ample, different languages have long been a barrier humans. Whether and how these AI-mediated inter- to interaction between humans. The languages one actions expand or contract capabilities and freedoms can speak or read can profoundly affect access to in- depend on how they are designed and implemented. formation, economic opportunities, quality medical Consider interactions between humans on social care, education and government services. Effective media platforms, mediated by machine learning al- machine translation has long been a goal of AI re- gorithms that rank, sort and filter what users see amid search, and recent models have a remarkable ability the content others post. Such algorithms are aligned to cheaply and quickly translate across hundreds of primarily with increasing firm revenue through a languages.44 But these models are far from perfect business model that translates engagement into ad and can produce false translations (hallucinations) or sales and revenue.47 So, how human interactions are toxic language.45 Even so, given the cost and shortage mediated is not aligned with promoting human de- of human translators, they hold remarkable potential velopment (chapter 5). Humans can in turn alter their to bridge language divides. Within a given language behaviour in response to algorithmic feedback—for 56 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 example, leveraging language that provokes engag- happen with an incredible degree of speed and scale. ing emotional responses.48 Thus, algorithms not only They can be direct, mediated by a human or indirect shape what interactions occur between individuals because of interactions in the same common space but can fundamentally alter individual behaviour in (such as a market). The dynamics of these interac- social contexts. tions may be more challenging to observe, and their impacts on human development are difficult to pre- “ That the same AI mediation between humans dict and identify directly and in a timely manner. can lead to vastly different outcomes across A classic example is automated financial trading, contexts highlights how the effects of a given where AI agents either autonomously or semiauto- system cannot be viewed in isolation. Likewise, nomously trade financial instruments in response to attempts to intervene and improve the alignment market fluctuations or other information. This ap- of algorithms will need to consider not only proach to trading is remarkably commonplace, as harms but also the potential loss of benefits machine learning can outcompete humans in many relevant contexts, particularly on short timescales. Balanced against these potentially detrimental im- Such interactions can reduce trading costs and im- pacts, AI-mediated online interactions between hu- prove financial inclusion for everyday investors but mans can improve job opportunities and engagement also increase market uncertainty.54 in democratic processes.49 These positive outcomes In algorithmic trading AI agents have similar goals, are well-aligned with human development yet emerge yet very distinct AI systems can interact in the same from the same platforms and algorithms. That the way. For example, machine learning predicts and same AI mediation between humans can lead to vast- collects characteristics of individuals on Facebook ly different outcomes across contexts highlights how for targeted advertising. Advertising companies may the effects of a given system cannot be viewed in iso- leverage AI to best use targeted advertising such that lation. Likewise, attempts to intervene and improve an AI system is operating on data compiled by AI to the alignment of algorithms will need to consider not place ads in a system that targets based on AI. Laws only harms but also the potential loss of benefits. intended to protect individuals can be violated with- Beyond social media AI has become an important out a human in the loop. In one case Facebook’s ad- intermediary between humans in contexts extending vertising platform enabled unlawful discriminatory beyond the digital world. Judges, employers, banks, housing advertising.55 landlords and schools use AI tools to evaluate individ- Interactions between AI systems can also improve uals’ suitability for release, employment, lending and those systems’ capacity and adjust their behaviour housing.50 Across industries large datasets determine and alignment. Although machine learning often in- prices for goods and services, at times dynamically in volves training agents on data, interactions between response to fluctuating demand or even tailoring prices AI systems can enable training for some tasks, even for individuals and markets.51 In the academy AI is crop- when data are scarce. Google’s AlphaZero, trained to ping up in the production and review of manuscripts— play chess solely through self-play, consistently beat despite experts’ calls for caution—embedding itself other chess engines.56 Its successor, MuZero, was de- into a core mechanism through which society gathers veloped to learn arbitrary games through self-play, and consolidates its understanding of the world.52 AI making for a much more general architecture. Be- similarly mediates cultural markets, differentially fa- yond games these approaches could help develop AI vouring some content producers over others.53 in rule-based contexts without the need for massive volumes of data.57 Similar approaches are emerging for relying on AI Interactions between AI agents to guide the behaviour of other AI systems. For exam- ple, one large language model can annotate output AI systems routinely interact with one another. Given features from another to provide feedback for fur- the remarkable speed at which computers can pro- ther training and refinement.58 These types of mutual cess and transmit information, these interactions can learning can be used in isolation or augment training CHAPTER 2 — FROM TOOLS TO AGENTS: REWIRING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO PROMOTE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 57 involving human annotation and guidance. These are Often, the benefits of such applications are front just a handful of examples highlighting how autono- and centre, motivating the use of a given technology mous agents can interact with one another. Such in- in the first place. Machine learning can help institu- teractions can be viewed as amplifiers that increase tions better allocate and target resources, increase AI systems’ abilities and complexity, which may the efficiency of internal processes and provide rel- make behaviour opaque and more unpredictable. evant information beyond the scale of what can fea- Compared with interactions between humans and sibly be discerned from raw data alone. For example, AI, however, these interactions are feasible to simu- the government of Togo leveraged AI to identify in- late and evaluate in silico. Research on interactions dividuals most likely to benefit from financial assis- between AI systems in the wild is limited, and under- tance during the Covid-19 pandemic.60 standing the impacts and potential for human devel- However, AI that does not—or that cannot—ac- opment will be crucial in the coming decades. complish its stated goals poses a real risk of, at best, waste and, at worst, causing harm or degrading de- cisionmaking.61 For example, software for predictive AI and institutions policing did little more than send police to the same areas where they historically made arrests, exacer- Human agency is often expressed and affected by de- bating biases and failing to actually “predict” any- cisions at larger scales of organizational complexity— thing useful.62 More generally, institutions hoping to institutions. Indeed, the early uses of AI in the 1990s leverage AI would do well to invest in audits and to were for business and military decisionmaking.59 ensure that those audits are effective.63 Whether AI When institutions rely on AI, they cede some agency can accomplish a task assigned to it—when its use in in information aggregation or decisionmaking to AI. an institution improves or degrades human agency Decisions once under the purview of consultants, war and freedoms—depends on the alignment of the in- rooms and board rooms are shaped or even made in stitution itself. If AI is leveraged to degrade human silico. rights, coerce consumers or replace good jobs, it may be at odds with human development. “ The use of AI in institutions has unique The examples here cover common and estab- considerations when viewed through the lens lished uses of AI. Given the rapid change in the AI of human development. The concerns and landscape, there has been equally fast adoption of opportunities may shift from those working opaque, less-explainable models in institutional sys- directly with AI towards how its use alters the tems. This may be intentional, such as relying on AI institutional impact on human development to synthesize reports in service of decisionmaking, or surreptitious, AI-written text, perhaps with halluci- The use of AI in institutions has unique considera- nated facts creeping into the decisionmaking process. tions when viewed through the lens of human devel- As a first-order priority, institutions would do well to opment. The concerns and opportunities may shift develop policies governing the use of AI and process- from those working directly with AI towards how its es for delineating human- and AI-produced informa- use alters the institutional impact on human develop- tion and temper excitement about new technology ment. Depending on the scale and nature of the in- with careful and considered application. stitution, AI-coupled decisionmaking in and between institutions may have outsized impacts on human development. Perhaps the most salient way AI can AI, humans and the physical world shape institutional decisionmaking is by parsing and aggregating large amounts of data. This transition to The rapid growth in AI’s capabilities, development big data and machine learning has been under way and deployment results in a similarly dramatic in- for over a decade, with large datasets and machine crease in how AI directly and indirectly learns from, learning now the norm for many institutions rather interacts with and affects the physical world. AI can than the exception. be fed information from any internet-coupled sensors 58 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 to collect and respond to real-time data on traffic, monitoring and managing pandemics to evaluating weather, stock markets, wildlife or other domains. broader disease patterns.73 And the impact of AI in Such information can inform human decisionmaking economic contexts is widespread (chapter 6). or directly and autonomously result in actions affect- Moving forward, we can anticipate increased AI ing the world. And AI systems can be embodied in integration in ways that directly affect our physical robotic systems that enable them to interact with the world or indirectly through informing and augment- physical world and accomplish tasks directly. ing human decisionmaking. Impacts will range from intended consequences to unexpected externalities— “ As with all digital technologies, AI and from clearly discernible development impacts to is not without its direct impacts on the the uncertain and inequitable or those requiring dif- environment, climate and sustainability ficult tradeoffs. While digitization’s impacts on the physical world date back a generation, applications of AI’s potential to buffer humanity in the AI are distinct in that decisions with real-world con- Anthropocene offers promise and risks. AI is already sequences will be increasingly made by agents whose helping detect sources of emissions, improve agri- behaviour is—to some degree—unpredictable and cultural efficiency, aid conservation efforts, improve unexplainable. weather prediction, promote renewable power pro- duction and facilitate sustainability more general- AI-infused social networks: What ly.64 But it has also been applied to increase fossil fuel happens when AI makes choices and cattle production—risking AI-increased rates of for, between and among us? carbon emissions.65 As with all digital technologies, AI is not without its direct impacts on the environ- Addressing many of today’s challenges depends on ment, climate and sustainability.66 Models can be whether and how we collectively decide to act. These resource-intensive to develop and train. The informa- large-scale decisions emerge from how individuals tion technology infrastructure that supports AI comes access, interact with, share and act on information.74 with its footprint in the natural world, not just in terms Historically, our collective behaviour depended sole- of energy but also in the extraction of finite resourc- ly on the nature and structure of interactions be- es, water and rare materials.67 When well-aligned tween humans—face-to-face or through television, with sustainable development, these indirect bene- radio and other forms of mass communication. As fits would ideally offset direct impacts.68 But there are described earlier, our collective behaviour is entering few guarantees that this will occur without active pol- a new era where social networks will shape human icy steps to reign in the ecological consequences of AI decisionmaking and behaviour at scale, including and harness its potential benefits. Indeed, AI seems various artificial forms of intelligence and decision- to have reversed or stalled some companies’ pledges making.75 The situation today is without precedent in to reduce their environmental impacts.69 the history of our species and comes when we cannot Beyond the natural world, AI is being readily inte- afford further gridlock or degradation in the ability to grated into our infrastructure and civil services. As manage interdependent crises and challenges. described earlier, advanced driver assistance systems As we progress, it will be essential to anticipate, in vehicles are becoming more commonplace, and identify and manage how artificial intelligence af- AI-powered navigation systems offer emissions-ef- fects collective behaviour, which is a key determinant ficient routes. The move towards smart cities lever- of our ability to improve human development. How ages AI to make sense of massive data from sensors might AI promote collective intelligence, break grid- and to inform policy—creating privacy concerns.70 AI lock and steer our decisions towards sustainability, streamlines supply chains and powers more complex equity and human flourishing? How might it hold us robots in factories and warehouses.71 Governments back? What new interdependent challenges will AI are evaluating and deploying AI to help distribute introduce? These big questions will require continual key services to citizens.72 Machine learning and AI re-evaluation as interactions between humans and AI are increasingly important in public health, from evolve. CHAPTER 2 — FROM TOOLS TO AGENTS: REWIRING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO PROMOTE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 59 AI can impact how we decide accuracy in each context can be difficult to assess, individually and collectively predict or guarantee.82 Finally, although AI may be able to summarize collective human intelligence, Scholars since Aristotle have recognized the potential there is no reason to believe it is, itself, collectively in- for groups to outperform individuals in decisionmak- telligent (see box S1.2.1 in spotlight 1.2 in chapter 1). ing.76 Collective intelligence underscores motivations Where AI and silicon sampling alone are not believed for democracies, juries, collaborative work and the to be sufficiently reliable, AI may be applicable for ag- convening of experts to solve challenges.77 From a gregating information generated by a human crowd. human development perspective collective intelli- Typical approaches to eliciting collective wisdom from gence can provide individuals access to information crowds rely on voting strategies, averaging and other and decisionmaking capabilities that exceed what in- mathematical procedures.83 While well-defined and dividuals can feasibly achieve independently. More- studied, these forms of aggregation often require boil- over, collective decisions are collective expressions of ing down complex decisions into simple sets of options individual agency—arising from the many choices, val- or estimates. Large language models may facilitate col- ues, needs and freedoms of individuals within a group. lective decisionmaking across more nuanced, natural language–based responses and surface features that “ Because many forms of AI are trained might be missed when laying out options.84 As these on large swaths of human-generated data, approaches improve, they may become valuable tech- they can be seen as potentially aggregating niques for collective decisionmaking, consensus for- knowledge across humans in their training set mation and eliciting feedback. to produce collectively intelligent responses Beyond top-down eliciting wisdom from crowds, collective intelligence also refers to processes that Broadly speaking, there are two ways in which col- emerge from the bottom up. From the human de- lective intelligence is harnessed in societal processes. velopment perspective our collective decisions are The first involves attempting to elicit a collective- manifestations of our individual agency. To the ex- ly intelligent decision from a crowd through voting, tent that AI can shape our choices as individuals, it polls, prediction markets or other methods of ag- is bound to have consequences for these impactful gregating opinions.78 Because many forms of AI are choices we make as groups. Examples of how col- trained on large swaths of human-generated data, lective intelligence facilitates human development they can be seen as potentially aggregating knowl- are wide-ranging. Individual decentralized contri- edge across humans in their training set to produce butions over the years to Wikipedia have resulted in collectively intelligent responses. Researchers have a remarkable compilation of knowledge.85 More gen- begun to evaluate the potential for AI as stand-ins erally, constructing and maintaining the open-source for human crowds in a process known as silicon sam- software ecosystem are a remarkable feat of human pling.79 Emerging evidence suggests silicon sampling collective intelligence.86 produces responses similar to those of human par- But collective intelligence is not a guaranteed feature ticipants in contexts as varied as voting preferences, of groups, and groups can equally become collective- numeric estimation tasks and moral assessments.80 ly foolish or exhibit behaviour that is sensible in a mo- Similarities between the behaviour of AI and humans ment but deleterious in the long run. Classic examples can reduce the costs of and expand access to polling a are market panics and mass hysterias.87 Theoretical and crowd while eliminating often exploitative platforms empirical evidence suggest essential conditions are re- typically used to perform such assessments.81 While quired to promote collective intelligence. Perhaps most promising, this application of AI to elicit collective in- fundamentally, at least some crowd members need ac- telligence requires some caution. AI cannot retrieve cess to approximately accurate information. Diversity answers missing from its dataset. It can hallucinate, in knowledge, problem-solving strategies and expertise may not perform equally well across knowledge do- can be critical, enabling collectives to search for a more mains and contexts and may exhibit cultural bias or extensive set of possible solutions when identifying the degraded performance across cultural contexts. And optimal one.88 60 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Beyond diversity the structure of interactions be- is support for policies to address climate change (72 tween individuals can be a crucial determinant of percent).93 Yet despite this clear global support sub- success. The benefits of diversity can be lost when stantive progress in addressing climate change has individuals holding conflicting opinions exist in echo been frustratingly slow, so there are big questions chambers and cannot bridge the divide.89 This rais- about whether, how and when AI will facilitate or hin- es immediate concerns about engagement-optimiz- der collective action. ing algorithms that disproportionately show content aligned with individuals’ pre-existing beliefs or ac- tively create conflict between groups.90 And large, Will AI choose our culture? dense, highly connected networks that are common online can undermine collective intelligence and Collective intelligence and decisionmaking describe alter decisionmaking.91 emergent properties of collectives that typically occur over short timescales. On longer timescales infor- “ Taken together, the likely impacts of AI on mation flows through collectives, giving rise to per- collective intelligence can be anticipated to be sistent norms, beliefs, values, knowledge and other large, varied and highly dependent on whether ephemera that shape cultures. The study of cultural collective intelligence is being elicited from evolution focuses on understanding how and why a group or occurring naturally within it cultures change as cultural artefacts emerge, spread, fixate, dwindle and vanish. Cultural evolution un- Taken together, the likely impacts of AI on collective dergirds the success of our species, as ingenuity can intelligence can be anticipated to be large, varied and be transmitted and refined, enabling us to adapt to highly dependent on whether collective intelligence is changing conditions.94 In the coming decades cultur- being elicited from a group or occurring naturally with- al evolutionary processes will shape our response and in it. In a sense, individuals with access to a large lan- adaptation to a rapidly changing world—and wheth- guage model are tapping into collective intelligence, er those changes sustainably and equitably promote enabling them to solve problems beyond their current human development.95 capabilities. Asking questions beyond the training set A key element of cultural evolution is the rate at or for which the model produces inaccurate responses which new culture emerges through innovation. Cou- may undetectably lead to the user to tap into collective pling human social networks with AI is almost certain folly. Yet, in general, AI will likely be a powerful tool to influence the rate and way cultural innovations for aggregating collective intelligence. While individu- occur. For one, various forms of AI can create new als tapping into collective intelligence through AI may cultural artefacts autonomously or in conjunction improve their capabilities, doing so may homogenize with humans. These can be the products of gener- information sources, reducing the diversity that emer- ative AI, strategies learned in self-play games or in- gent collective intelligence depends on. And filter bub- novations such as novel drugs and facilitated insight bles, asymmetric influences and dense connections into scientific problems (see box 2.1).96 Even pure- within AI-defined social networks may alter and even ly machine-generated cultural artefacts can diffuse reduce emergent collective wisdom that has long been into human culture, such as strategies learned by ma- a cornerstone of decisionmaking in democratic socie- chines through self-play in the game Go, resulting in ties and institutions. drastic differences in play among humans.97 Once collectives arrive at a solution, it is necessary AI can disseminate, sort, modify and filter cultur- to coordinate and act. Remarkable examples of suc- al artefacts when acting as an intermediary between cessful large-scale collective action range from rap- humans. In a sense any data-trained model implicitly idly responding to the depletion of the ozone layer to disseminates the cultural features of its training data. eradicating pathogens such as smallpox.92 But failures Often, training data are scraped from the open inter- to act are also common, as with climate change. A re- net so that the available data reflect the history of the cent survey of 62 countries indicated that belief in cli- digital divide and disproportionately represent indi- mate change is widespread globally (86 percent), as viduals from high HDI countries. This can result in CHAPTER 2 — FROM TOOLS TO AGENTS: REWIRING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO PROMOTE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 61 large language models adopting the cultural charac- our agency and freedoms both individually and col- teristics found in their training set. One recent study lectively, now and in posterity. Against the breadth found that responses by large language models were of possible impacts, the task of adopting AI in a way consistent with English-speaking, very high HDI that preserves—much less expands—human agency countries such as Australia, Canada, New Zealand, can seem daunting. Even something as trivial and the United Kingdom and the United States but cultur- commonplace as a newsfeed recommendation can ally distinct from places such as Libya, Pakistan and alter the information on which we base choices as Tunisia—with countries’ cultural differences from the individuals, with emergent consequences on dem- United States correlated with how much ChatGPT ocratic outcomes and in posterity through cultural reflects the culture of those countries (figure 2.4).98 shifts. If such decades-old ranking algorithms convey Disaggregating these data by HDI level reveals that these risks, what do we make of the newly expanded ChatGPT tends to more strongly reflect cultures in decisionmaking capabilities of large language mod- very high HDI countries and less resemble cultures in els, or whatever technologies arise in the near term? low HDI countries. This is unsurprising because areas This fundamentally changes the calculus as more that crossed the digital divide earlier left larger on- powerful models come online, because they are not line footprints for training these models. Thus, while simply “better” but provide a wider range of possi- technologies such as large language models may fos- ble outcomes for agency, ranging from promoting it ter innovation, they may do so in a way that selective- to undermining it (see figure 2.2). In many cases the ly favours and reinforces views from countries better best form of AI for a given context may be some- represented in their dataset. This risks new inequal- thing simpler that we can understand and that retains ities whereby closing the digital divide may result in agency. In others the newfound capabilities—such as cultural homogenization and net decreases in cultur- conversing in natural language—may provide ways of al diversity and innovation. restoring and expanding agency (chapter 5). Although AI is no longer well understood as a tool, agenticity it- Preserving and expanding self is a tool we can leverage when appropriate. human agency across scales This perspective is particularly salient when we consider the emergent consequences of embed- Above, we laid out the dizzying myriad potential con- ding AI into our social networks, from its impacts sequences of AI for human development, impacting on collective decisionmaking in the here and now to Figure 2.4 Cultural differences from the United States explain the use of ChatGPT Correlation between GPT and humans Correlation between GPT and humans 0.90 0.90 AustraliaUnited Kingdom New Zealand Germany 0.85 Netherlands 0.85 Canada Uruguay Japan Andorra United States Hong Kong, China (SAR) 0.80 A rgentina 0.80 Singapore C hile Rep. of Ukraine Cyprus Ser K b o ia rea Thailand 0.75 Fed R e u r s a s ti i o an n Brazil Türkiye Viet C N h a in m a 0.75 Kazakhstan Iran RomaniaMexico Colombia G M u o a ro te c m co ala 0.70 Lebanon Peru Ecuad M o a r laysia I A ra rm q enia Egypt 0.70 Zimbabwe Philippines Jordan Ethiopia 0.65 Tunisia Indonesia 0.65 Nigeria Pakistan Libya Kyrgyzstan 0.60 0.60 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 Low Medium High Very high Cultural distance from the United States Human Development Index group Source: Atari and others 2025. 62 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 longer-term impacts on cultural selection. If we cede how the systems arrived at those decisions and our individual agency to unpredictable AI, we are roll- verify the decisions before actions are taken can ing the dice with human development at scale. How- ensure that agency remains intact even if choices ever, if AI is designed in ways that promote human are automated. agency, we can ensure that humans can steer their fu- ture according to their values, needs and goals. 4. Heed the scale of effects and cultural contexts. AI that Although this chapter has largely dabbled in the ab- is used by institutions or that impacts information stract, from it arise more concrete recommendations flows between people can have outsized effects on the for deploying AI: decisions we make and how those decisions shape our future. Scientific and regulatory attention should be 1. Start with simpler and more tool-like AI. These sys- paid especially to AI that sorts, filters and summariz- tems are more predictable, readily explained and un- es the information we use to make decisions or that derstood, and easier to modify so that our choices makes decisions for large swaths of individuals. remain choices (see table 2.1). 5. Do not ignore boring, tedious and repetitive choic- 2. Consider large-language models, which hold promise es, which may make the best use cases. Not every as interfaces. Amid the captivating way in which choice we make expresses our agency to a mean- these tools make broad-ranging choices, it is easy ingful extent—some are simply decisions we must to lose sight of their linguistic capabilities and what make on the path to more important actions. AI that means for human development. Literacy and already makes many of these choices for us—deter- language barriers have befuddled expansion of the mining the fastest route to work, showing the cor- promises of digital tools, and these technologies in rect spelling of a word, identifying and removing their current form are capable of drastically reduc- scams. More broadly capable AI, emerging every ing these barriers. Choices of how to translate var- day, often gets coverage for its exciting possibil- ious words or how to convert speech to text likely ities—but the boring AI may be among the most minimally reflect one’s agency—such that adopting agency-expanding. technologies to overcome these barriers seems im- These recommendations are nonexhaustive but mediately doable and worthwhile. illustrate the clarity provided by centring human agency rather than being distracted by the newest 3. Automate and change rarely; explain and verify often. machine. This perspective further alleviates the need Automation risks decisions being made and conse- to predict what is next for these technologies, from quences being accumulated at a rate that precludes stagnation to artificial general intelligence, and al- humans from weighing in. Similarly, benefits of nom- lows us to face whatever comes next by simply asking inally “improving” AI on a task should be weighed how it can be leveraged to improve human agency. against risks that changes will lead to different out- Perhaps most fundamentally, this perspective re- comes than people expect. Designing systems so stores human agency in a broad way—asking what we that humans can have time, if they choose, to inter- can choose to do now, rather than hoping something rogate the choices the systems make, understand more agentic will come and choose for us. CHAPTER 2 — FROM TOOLS TO AGENTS: REWIRING ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO PROMOTE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 63 CHAPTER 3 Artificial intelligence across life stages: Insights from a people- centred perspective 65 CHAPTER 3 Artificial intelligence across life stages: Insights from a people- centred perspective People at each life stage use artificial intelligence (AI) with varying frequency and for different purposes, influenced largely by the institutions they are embedded in. Nearly half of students and a quarter of working people use AI-powered applications more than once a week, primarily for education and work. In contrast, only 15 percent of nonworking people and 9 percent of retired individuals do so, mostly for entertainment and health. These differences in frequency and purpose of use shape the ways in which AI affects people’s lives. The life stage perspective reveals three policy imperatives—the “three I’s”—for advancing human development: Invest in universal access to electricity, internet, digital devices and the skills needed to use them effectively. Inform people of the risks and opportunities of AI, enabling them to make informed choices about when and how to use it. Include people of all ages, genders, ethnicities and backgrounds in AI design and development, and bring firms into inclusive policy conversations on how to make AI work for people. 66 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 From school computers and teenagers’ smartphones tutors’ work in many ways. Since school- age children to work platforms and advanced imaging in health- spend considerable time in an umbrella institution, care, artificial intelligence (AI) now plays an integral capability- enhancing uses of technology are easier role in digital technologies. But to what ends? To pro- to implement through school curricula and practices vide access to information about almost anything? in the classroom. And AI- powered learning tools can To entertain people? To augment what humans can foster equal opportunities for all students, including do and be? This chapter asks whether AI is helping those with special needs. expand people’s capabilities to fully realize their po- Students use AI frequently, mostly for education tential. It provides insights from a people- centred and entertainment (see figure 3.1). The teenage years perspective showing how AI is reshaping people’s involve substantial risk of overuse and even addic- lives across age groups, changing the way peo- tion to digital platforms powered by AI algorithms ple function and societies operate — thus reshaping optimized for engagement, potentially exacerbat- human development.1 ed by AI- supported dialogues and fake images. And The frequency and purpose of AI use differs across with excessive use of social media platforms, there people at each life stage. Almost half of students and may be adverse effects on mental health, with risks a quarter of working people use AI-powered appli- of anorexia, depression and anxiety. Since students cations more than once a week—mostly for educa- use these applications mostly in their free time, safe tion and work—while only 15 percent of nonworking use depends mainly on oversight by families and adults and 9 percent of retired people do so, mostly other caregivers, potentially amplifying inequalities for entertainment and health (figure 3.1). This is part- in society.4 For social and emotional wellbeing, rapid ly because people are surrounded by institutions that responses from institutions have to keep up with vary in the ability to shape AI use.2 With different use, technological developments. people are affected differently: their freedoms are People in adult life have multiple overlapping identi- not always expanded, and at times they are exposed ties, each involving different uses of AI. In profession- to risks and challenges. The life- stage approach dis- al life AI may increase productivity and augment what entangles some of these effects to show how social, workers can do, but if it is biased towards automation, political and economic institutions can enable people it can also mean job losses for incumbents. Parents to harness AI in ways that expand human develop- have a substantial role in modelling and teaching the ment. Within this approach the goal is not to analyse responsible use of new technologies, and friends and how using AI during one life stage affects the others — partners may engage in synthetic relationships with because there is not yet enough evidence on this, es- AI- powered companions. Although adults also fre- pecially for older people — but to zoom in on each life quently use AI for entertainment (see figure 3.1), they stage separately to derive policy options tailored to appear better equipped to regulate their emotions and the challenges and opportunities of each age group. behaviour, given their brain and body development.5 During early childhood excessive use of some Still, concerns remain about autonomy, authenticity digital technologies can have adverse effects on and agency as recommender systems may shape pref- socioemotional development and basic functions erence formation and decisionmaking. — and can even alter brain development — with con- Generally, older people who did not grow up with sequences that may last a lifetime. For many young modern technology are more critical of AI and use children, family or private daycare arrangements are it less frequently (see figure 3.1). Communication the main institutional setting, making an overarch- apps and promising AI- facilitated tools in the health ing approach to protecting small children in line with sector, which older people use the most, can reduce the Convention on the Rights of the Child more chal- social isolation and improve physical wellbeing, but lenging. This particularly vulnerable life stage needs older people’s needs and preferences must be part regulation and the protections stipulated in the Con- of these products’ design. Human connections and vention on the Rights of the Child from 1989.3 options, such as having the possibility of interacting When individuals are in school, AI can enhance with a person rather than an automated service, are learning opportunities and augment teachers’ and keys to expanding their freedoms in this digital age. CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 67 Figure 3.1 People at each life stage use artificial intelligence (AI) with varying frequency and for different purposes Frequency of AI use by occupation Purpose of AI use by occupation group Share of survey respondents (%) 4 13 Work Don’t know/ Never Prefer not Education to say 21 STUDENT Once Entertainment a month 42 20 Health More than Once once a week a week 22 6 More than Don’t know/ once a week Prefer not to say 17 Once WORKFORCE 30 a week Never 25 Once a month 15 10 More than Don’t know/ once a week Prefer not to say 14 NON- Once WORKFORCE a week 39 Never 22 Once a month 9 8 More than Don’t know/ once a week Prefer not to say 11 Once RETIRED a week 17 55 Once Never a month 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 Share of survey respondents (%) Note: Based on pooled data for 21 countries. For purpose of AI use, the followi ng responses to the question, “In the past 30 days, have you ever interacted with artificial intelligence, such as chatbots, in any of the following ways?” were used to calculate the average use of AI for work, educa- tion, entertainment and health: “work” is based on the response “work-related tools or software,” “ed ucation” is based on the response “educational platforms of learning apps,” “entertainment” is based on the response “entertainment (e.g. streaming servi ces/gaming)” and “health” is based on the response “health care services or applications.” For frequency of AI use, the question was “How often have you used artificial intelligence tools such as ChatGPT, Google Gemini, Microsoft Copilot, etc., in the past 12 months?” and allowed for a single response. For occupation group the following responses to the question “What best describes you? Are you…?” were used: “working” includes self-identified full- and part-time employees and self-employed respondents, and “not working” includes homemakers and unemployed respondents. Source: Human Development Report Office based on data from the United Nations Development Programme Survey on AI and Human Development. Which policies can help harness AI to expand human some guiding principles for decisionmaking. The chap- freedoms, enhance agency and foster human develop- ter identifies three policy imperatives for all life stag- ment? The human development framework provides es: invest, inform and include. Investing in universal 68 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure 3.2 Invest, inform and include for people-c entred artificial intelligence (AI) INVEST in AI technology that protects children’s rights in the digital space. parents, paediatricians and caregivers about risks related to young INFORM children’s digital technology use. INCLUDE the private sector in working groups on children’s rights and protection. INVEST in universal access to digital devices and AI in classrooms. about potential biases in AI systems and prevent the stifling of creativity INFORM and critical thinking. INCLUDE responsible use of AI in school curricula, emphasizing skill development. in public-private partnerships to make AI-powered social media safe INVEST for adolescents. about AI-powered social media’s addictive features and susceptibility INFORM to social comparison. adolescents in the critical evaluation of social media and other INCLUDE AI-powered products. in subsidies for companies that offer human options to make sure INVEST nobody is left behind. INFORM about role modeling responsible AI use to influence future generations. explanations about how AI products and algorithms work to strengthen INCLUDE adults’ agency. in access, training and support for older adults to empower them to INVEST navigate AI applications. older people about AI innovations, highlighting applications in their INFORM areas of interest. older people in the development of AI products so that their needs are INCLUDE adequately reflected. Source: Human Development Report Office. electricity, internet devices and digital skills can ex- Early childhood — too pand individual capabilities by facilitating access to AI little, too much, too risky and the ability to use it effectively. Informing people of when and how to use AI can expand their functionings The impact of digital technologies and help them fully realize their potential. Including on early childhood development is a people of all ages, genders, ethnicities and backgrounds topic of hope and concern as societies can allow them to align their choices with their values around the globe become more digitally connected. and thus exercise their agency (figure 3.2). The effects of screen time — associated with many AI CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 69 applications used by toddlers — can be both positive and decreased executive functioning — higher cog- and negative for young children’s emotional, cogni- nitive processes that help with planning, organizing, tive and physical development. The type of activity problem solving and self- regulation. And it can lead and its duration determine the actual impact. Very to inappropriate conduct, reduced physical activity, young children spend most of their time at home with poor language skills and limited vocabulary, especial- family members or in private daycare.6 So, ensuring ly at a very young age.9 Vocabularies can be assessed that AI technologies are development enhancing is through cognitive testing and monitored using diffu- essential; otherwise, the consequences for brain de- sion tensor imaging, which visualizes brain changes velopment can be severe. Indeed, impaired brain associated with excessive screen time (figure 3.3).10 development can limit human freedoms through- Violent video games are a major risk, since they can out life, impeding choices, capabilities, agency and exacerbate aggressive behaviour, reduce empathy thus human development. And even without screen and diminish prosocial behaviours.11 time children’s vulnerability is reflected in the online Most findings come from local or national studies sphere, multiplied by new AI- powered tools (box 3.1). because of a dearth of globally comparative data on developmental milestones. Attention- deficit/hyper- activity disorder (ADHD), diagnosed according to Young brain structures change similar criteria all over the world, is used as a proxy with too much screen time for hyperactivity and low attention spans in children. And although ADHD is more complex, including Toddlers’ use of AI often involves a screen, and in- other symptoms such as impulsiveness,12 its prev- teractive screen time can deliver benefits. For exam- alence across countries can shed some light on the ple, the right software and environment can improve relation between screen time and ADHD symptoms. early childhood learning, including vocabulary, nu- Several recent studies suggest that, in addition to ge- meracy and digital skills that improve later academ- netics and other behavioural factors, excessive screen ic performance.7 But these benefits occur only when time during early childhood can play a role in ADHD. used for a very limited amount of time. But children with ADHD might be granted more Excessive screen time can lead to a range of de- screen time because their condition makes supervis- velopmental issues, especially emotional and behav- ing them more challenging.13 ioural problems, such as hyperactivity, low attention The implications of excessive screen time and lack span and peer problems.8 It can also lead to delayed of access to screens on the brain development of fu- developmental milestones, impaired motor skills ture generations both seem profound. Examples Figure 3.3 Excessive screen time in early childhood is related to changes in the brain structure— and to reduced language capacity and understanding Lower fractional anisotropy Higher radial diffusivity Left Front Right Left Front Right ΔFA per ScreenQ Point ×10–3 ΔRD (mm2/s) per ScreenQ Point ×10–6 –3.0 –3.5 –4.0 –4.5 –5.0 –5.5 –6.0 8.0 7.5 7.0 6.5 6.0 5.5 5.0 4.5 4.0 3.5 3.0 Note: The figure depicts diffusion tensor MRI scans of preschoolers’ brains that show the decline in fractional anisotropy and the increase in radial diffusivity, both of which are crucial for language understanding and capacity, as screen use rises. Darker colours indicate more change. Screen use is measured by ScreenQ, a 15-i tem measure of screen- based media use reflecting the domains of the American Academy of Pediatrics recommenda- tions: access to screens, frequency of use, content viewed and coviewing. Higher scores reflect greater use. Source: Hutton and others 2020. 70 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Box 3.1 Artificial intelligence can violate children’s rights — or protect them Online child sexual abuse can take several forms, from sharing sexual images or videos to online solicitation consisting of unwanted or pressured sexual interactions.1 Such abuse is common even in regions with low access to digital technologies (box figure 1)— and sharply on the rise in many African countries.2 While solicitation is more common among adolescents, most image- based abuse (around 85 percent) affects prepubescent children, including infants and toddlers.3 The younger the child, the more severe the abuse.4 The majority of images show female children.5 Abusive images are refined and reproduced by artificial intelligence (AI)–powered apps, multiplying the violations of children’s rights.6 Box figure 1 Online child sexual abuse occurs even in regions with low access to technology Children under age 18 affected in the past year, 2024 or most recent year available (%) 25 20 15 10 5 0 East Asia South Latin Eastern and West and Middle East Eastern Western North and Pacific Asiaa America and Southern Central and North Europe and Europe America Caribbean Africa Africa Africaa Central Asia Image-based abuse Solicitation a. Data on solicitation are not available. Note: Image- based abuse includes all nonconsensual taking and sharing of sexual images and videos of a child, as well as unwanted exposure of a child to pornographic materials. Solicitation covers a range of unwanted and pressured sexual interactions, including sexual inquiries over mobile phones or the internet, as well as long- lasting sexual conversations that can lead to exchanges of sexual pictures or videos. Source: Human Development Report Office using data from Childlight (2024). AI can allow the massive production and dissemination of material that violates children’s rights, including fake images and AI- generated images based on “famous” abuse victims.7 But it can also augment humans’ analysis of images and video to flag potentially harmful content for further review.8 Unlike hashing technologies that rely on exact data matches, such as PhotoDNA,9 AI algorithms are adaptive and can be trained to detect harmful images by recognizing patterns in the data.10 This approach can increase the detection rate of harmful content over human intervention alone and helps prevent the repeated sharing of prohibited images, thus reducing the revictimization of the children depicted in the content.11 AI-f acilitated tools can also assist in identifying and tracking perpetrators. By analysing patterns of online engagement, AI algorithms can provide useful information to locate creators and distributors of harmful material.12 Article 4 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child obliges signatories to introduce laws and regulations that prevent companies from infringing on children’s rights, to monitor their compliance and to ensure effective enforce- ment and remedies for child rights violations.13 The United Nations Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights and the Children’s Rights and Business Principles provide a framework to meet responsibilities towards children’s rights.14 The Global Digital Compact solidifies states’ commitment to protect children’s rights in response to emerging technologies and their as- sociated opportunities and risks.15 Governments and private companies should collaborate and invest in AI- facilitated tools to augment humans in detecting and deleting content harmful for children. Notes 1. Childlight 2024. 2. ChildFund International and African Child Policy Forum 2024. 3. INHOPE 2023. 4. ECPAT and INTERPOL 2018. 5. In one sample as much as 99 percent of images were of girls (IWF 2024). See also ECPAT and INTERPOL (2018). 6. IWF 2024. 7. IWF 2024. 8. Amlani 2024; Anglia Ruskin University 2024; Child Rescue Coalition 2024; Grzegorczyk 2023; IWF 2023, 2024; Krishna, Dubrosa and Milanaik 2024; Singh and Nambiar 2024; US Department of Homeland Security 2024. 9. Allen 2011. 10. Grzegorczyk 2023. 11. Allen 2011; Fry 2024; Grzegorczyk 2023. 12. Grzegorczyk 2023. 13. Pothong 2025; UN 1989a. 14. UNICEF 2012; United Nations and UNOHCHR 2011. 15. UN 2024b. CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 71 from countries that have had widely diffused digital and bridge education gaps in the light of constrained technologies for years can make evidence- based in- resources. Fascinating advances have also been formation more compelling, generating important made in using AI to support disadvantaged students messages for policymaking in countries where digital (box 3.2). It also holds promise in aiding interventions technologies are not yet as widely available. to reduce school dropout rates, especially in low- As digital access expands globally, a task for gov- income countries, where such rates are high.17 For ernments is to roll out campaigns that inform par- that, however, universal access to digital technologies ents, paediatricians, teachers and other caregivers is paramount. about the adverse effects of excessive screen time. Inherent biases in AI systems, particularly from Screens are sometimes used when parents are actual- the perspectives and backgrounds of their devel- ly in need of childcare — for example, when they are opers, can exacerbate inequalities between racial, working remotely or busy with other tasks around the ethnic and religious groups.18 There are also ethical house. This should reinitiate a conversation about af- concerns about privacy, security and responsible AI fordable and flexible childcare. Community- level use.19 At the AI Academy in Tajikistan,20 students and programmes can offer valuable alternatives, with teachers developed a machine learning–based credit- flexible times and signups. scoring product for microloans that outperformed scoring systems used by other banks in the region.21 School age — access, But AI in credit scoring raises concerns about data regulation and ownership privacy, potential algorithmic bias and lack of trans- parency in decisionmaking. Ethical considerations Whether AI benefits or harms school- of fairness, accountability and responsibility also re- age children depends on how institu- quire careful attention.22 tions regulate and inform their use. Constant vigilance and policy attention to embed- Access to the internet has helped advance children’s ded biases can prevent discrimination. By purpose- learning in recent years. But since AI has come into fully building and deploying AI- powered tools with play, new and challenging questions have emerged. these considerations in mind, the benefits can be har- What about the risk that children who use AI for nessed without unintentionally increasing exclusion. schoolwork lose out on interpersonal skill develop- ment? Since most school- age children are enrolled in some type of formal education, social and politi- And what happens to skills? cal institutions have a more direct influence on their technology use, which makes it easier to mitigate While AI has the capacity to tailor learning experi- risks and enhance benefits. ences to individual student needs, concerns have emerged about its potential to stifle creativity and other essential skills. AI could facilitate overempha- AI in the classroom— inequality sis on standardized testing and overshadow crucial rising, declining or both? abilities such as creativity, collaboration and critical thinking.23 Some of these soft skills, also linked to AI’s potential for expanding students’ capabilities emotional intelligence, will become more important through education is becoming more evident for as AI becomes better at routine text and data analysis. those who have access to it. AI- powered apps can Using AI- powered chatbots for schoolwork could provide study assistance when educators or parents also undermine opportunities to learn skills such face time or resource constraints.14 They can gam- as analysing text, elaborating syntheses and writ- ify the study experience to motivate students.15 And ing coherent narratives. The writing process stimu- they can improve personalized learning by tailoring lates thinking, scrutinizing and self- improvement, educational content to individual student needs and tasks that all students should learn. But when it is predicting their next learning steps.16 AI could thus outsourced to AI- facilitated tools (cognitive offload- level the playing field for disadvantaged students ing), the reduction in cognitive effort can reduce 72 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Box 3.2 Levelling the playing field for disadvantaged students Innovations in artificial intelligence (AI) could boost the capabilities of students facing disadvantages during their education journey. Migrant children, for example, can face language barriers and different stages of learning when joining their host country’s education system.1 AI has addressed both, offering real-t ime voice- activated translations and individually tailored educational resources, translated into several minority languages.2 Similar tools can be used in refugee camps to adapt instructions to individuals with diverse education backgrounds, though major challenges include children’s digital illiteracy and the costs of running AI- powered programs.3 An educational platform in Kenya uses AI- facilitated adaptive learning engines to assess student performance and provide tailored lessons in several languages (box figure 1). It has reached more than 20,000 children,4 even students without access to the internet, with personalized lessons, questions, remedial learning and evaluation through SMS.5 The platform reduces language barriers by including minority languages not typically covered in the standard educa- tion curriculum and languages spoken by refugees from neighbouring Somalia and South Sudan.6 It operates in the most challenging learning environments, such as slums in Nairobi and the rural Dadaab refugee camp.7 It also offers microcourses on business and entrepreneurship for youth and adult refugees and courses on employability skills for youth with physical, hearing and visual impairments.8 This and similar platforms rely on collaboration and funding from international organizations, development agen- cies and nongovernmental organizations to purchase and distribute its products. Public-p rivate partnerships are essential to deploy these technologies where they are needed most. Box figure 1 Artificial intelligence tailors lessons, even for students without internet access Source: Human Development Report Office, adapted from M-Shule (2023b). Notes 1. Drolia and others 2022. 2. UNESCO 2019. 3. Tzirides 2022. 4. UNESCO 2022. 5. UNESCO 2022. 6. M- Shule 2023a. 7. UNESCO 2022. 8. M- Shule 2023b. memory retention and diminish learning and cogni- Increasing or perpetuating inequalities is also a tive abilities.24 Learners may remember only where risk. Since individuals who believe they have a lim- they stored information but fail to integrate it into ited memory capacity tend to offload information their brain’s secondary knowledge. This can create an more frequently, their knowledge deficit can widen, illusion of having learned the information, increasing possibly reducing their learning performance over the risk of memory manipulation or corruption.25 time.26 Even students are worried that AI- powered CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 73 chatbots, although convenient, diminish their writing However, a base of knowledge is required for the skills and hamper their motivation and drive to com- brain to refer to during creative or critical thinking. pose on their own.27 These higher- order thinking skills are essential for Concerns about calculators diminishing math problem solving and can be developed only if the skills were similar. Released to the public in the early brain can retrieve facts and figures from past learning 1970s, the first handheld calculator was expensive. processes.30 Once readily available in all classrooms (around 1980 in the United States), mathematics achievement was expected to decline —this was not the case, howev- And to social interactions? er; it even improved slightly (figure 3.4).28 The rea- son is believed to lie in the level at which calculators If used excessively in education, AI can put at risk are used in school — usually not earlier than middle valuable human connections and the sense of com- school, when fundamental mathematics skills should munity in the learning process.31 Since machines lack have already been acquired. After this milestone the empathy hormone, oxytocin — which can “cou- using a calculator can lead to higher student achieve- ple two brains” in such a way that they are linked ment.29 The implication could be the same for AI- to each other, making learning more efficient — AI powered chatbots: once students have acquired basic is biologically unable to perform some features of writing and text analysis skills, the chatbots could im- teaching.32 This is one of many reasons why teach- prove the learning process through review and feed- ers cannot be substituted for or even replaced by AI back, accompanied by a teacher or other caregiver. (chapter 1). Instead, AI- powered apps and programs Figure 3.4 Mathematics achievement in the United States did not decline after calculators became available in the classroom Scale score 350 340 330 320 310 304 300* 298* 302* 305 307 306 307 308 307 300 305 306 306 290 281* 280 273* 274* 274* 276* 270 266* 264* 269* 269* 270* 279* 281* 285 260 250 241 240 230* 230* 231* 231* 232* 243 244 230 222* 239* 219* 219* 219* 220 210 200 1973 1978 1982 1986 1990 1992 1994 1996 1999 2004 2008 2012 Age 17 Extrapolated data Age 13 Original assessment format Age 9 Revised assessment format * Significantly different from the 2012 value at p < .05. Note: Extrapolated data adjust for the limited number of questions that the 1973 mathematics assessment had in common with later assessments. Original assessment format uses the same assessment procedures established for the first assessment year. Revised assessment format incorporates more current assessment procedures and content. Source: US National Center for Education Statistics 2013. 74 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 can be complementary tools under close teacher Adolescence — or caregiver supervision or can help teachers with smartphones, AI- other tasks, allowing more time for student interac- powered apps and tion (chapter 2). As AI continues to permeate educa- mental wellbeing, much tion, its benefits and potential drawbacks should be ado about nothing? continually monitored by interdisciplinary teams of educators, neuroscience researchers, policymakers Although most adolescents still participate in some and other stakeholders to ensure that future genera- form of official schooling, this stage of life deserves a tions are well- equipped for a world increasingly inter- separate section from school age, given the profound twined with technology. neurobiological, behavioural and environmental Some concerns about children’s interactions with changes that affect how adolescents interact with AI- different forms of AI are similar to more traditional powered apps.39 concerns about the use of digital devices — for example, Buzzing controversies among researchers, poli- substituting offline activities such as playing togeth- ticians and caregivers have emerged about wheth- er outside with social interactions in the online space, er smartphones have a negative impact on young as well as disinformation and security of personal in- people’s wellbeing. Empirical evidence points to a formation, especially in the light of sophisticated and concerning decline in subjective wellbeing, which adaptable AI-p owered conversation partners.33 Other is also reflected in a rise in indicators that measure concerns are specific to the new possibilities of inter- mental disorders, such as anxiety and depression.40 acting with AI, such as developing social etiquette. The effect has been particularly strong for young Digital assistants do not yet teach good manners women.41 The sharp decline in wellbeing has altered or require politeness, so children may eventually get what was commonly known as the U- shaped curve used to an undesirable form of communication when of wellbeing throughout the life course: life satisfac- interacting with humans.34 Again, that is why digital tion was highest at young age, then dipped during technologies should complement but not substitute middle age and rose during old age (spotlight 3.1).42 for humans, especially around children. The good These changes have gone hand in hand with the in- news is that when interacting with digital voice assis- creasing use of smartphones among the wider public, tants, children identify them as machines and sourc- especially in countries with very high Human De- es of information, at best as social learning partners, velopment Index (HDI) values, although the causal but do not accord them the same value as humans.35 mechanisms underlying this relationship are not fully Children reveal less information when interacting established.43 with the devices and are more influenced and en- gaged when interacting with humans.36 Social interaction is at the core of human learning, Less is more, and quality matters since problem- solving skills are greatly improved through implicit communication, such as imitating What lies behind this association? Should parents try others. Correctly interpreting others’ mental state to to ban smartphones during adolescence altogether? understand their knowledge and intent is a major fac- The evidence is mixed, partly because not all stud- tor in wellbeing and in the ability to navigate the world ies disaggregate for age, which seems to be crucial of work, whether in the labour market or personal af- for the effects of smartphones on wellbeing.44 AI al- fairs. It is best learned when practiced with empathetic gorithms that make recommendations on social plat- human beings.37 An experiment in a nature classroom forms based on online behaviour and optimized for showed that students who had been away from screens engagement have addictive potential. And that can for five days improved their recognition of nonverbal trigger sleep deprivation, pervasive social compar- emotional and social cues more than their peers who isons, lack of physical exercise and social isolation had not been away from screens. Time away from caused by tradeoffs between time spent online and screen- based media and digital communication tools time spent socializing in person, leading to a decline improved both emotional and social intelligence.38 in wellbeing.45 Excessive use of certain social media CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 75 increases upward social comparison, which reduces equally strong determinants of mental health and subjective wellbeing indicators such as life satisfac- wellbeing.50 A complementary explanation for de- tion, self- worth and self- esteem.46 And even in the clining mental wellbeing in the past five years could absence of addiction or enjoyment, young people be related to the Covid-19 pandemic. Recent brain may feel pressured into using certain platforms, be- images from adolescents reveal accelerated cortical cause most of their peers do (spotlight 3.2). thinning — a sign of a maturing brain —more notable Since adolescents are especially vulnerable to in females than in males (figure 3.5). This process socioemotional disorders given the developmental is attributed to chronic stress and adversity during changes in behaviour, cognition and neurobiology development, a hint at the life disruptions during occurring at their age, they are also more suscepti- lockdowns. Cortical thinning, while not necessarily ble to social comparison, modifying self- images, so- bad, is associated with higher anxiety and depression cial feedback, stress and reward mechanisms.47 With rates. The difference between males and females can the development of increasingly sophisticated AI be accounted for by females’ stronger social connec- technologies, several facets of social media can be tions and reliance on sharing stress- related events especially perilous for adolescents — particularly for with peers.51 young women, who are often more susceptible to so- Some online activities that use AI algorithms, such cial comparison and idealization of body images than as educational programs and music apps, can be ben- their male counterparts (box 3.3). Moreover, specific eficial without being addictive.52 Young people who characteristics of the digital environment contribute already have mental health issues use their phones, to online disinhibition, leading individuals to exhib- or the internet in general, more often and in different it different behaviours, thoughts and emotions in on- ways from their peers.53 line interactions compared with in- person settings.48 The bottom line: not all adolescents will neces- All of this points to the need for careful evaluation of sarily develop depression or anxiety when exces- the effect of smartphone use, especially social media, sively using a smartphone or being on social media. on wellbeing among adolescents.49 Young people with pre- existing mental health issues But other factors — such as genetics, a lack of strong or vulnerabilities are more likely to do so, especial- relationships or adverse childhood experience, in- ly when using social media with AI- powered recom- cluding abuse, neglect and trauma — are at least mender systems.54 Screen access should always be Figure 3.5 Pandemic- related stress is a complementary explanation for adolescents’ mental illbeing Female cortical thinning Male cortical thinning Note: Regions with significantly accelerated cortical thinning in the adolescent female and male brains after the Covid-1 9 pandemic are shown in colour. Source: Corrigan, Rokem and Kuhl 2024. 76 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Box 3.3 Artificial intelligence on social media undermines agency and drives emotions— but only for some young people so far The growing prevalence of social media recommender systems optimized for engagement based on online behav- iour; of AI- powered photo filters, chatbots and editing tools; and of artificial intelligcen (AI)– generated content such as deepfakes poses potential risks to mental wellbeing. The risk is especially high for young people, as they are the primary users of social media and are more vulnerable to peer pressure than other age groups.1 Problematic social media use is a strong predictor of psychosomatic complaints and low life satisfaction in 15-y ear-olds across 37 coun- tries. With excessive social media use, the odds of having psychosomatic complaints rise by about 39 percent, and life satisfaction falls by 33 percent.2 Even so, some aspects of social media— such as searching for peer support, using platforms as creative outlets and improving connectedness to friends— have positive effects on mental wellbeing.3 Social media recommender systems optimized by AI for engagement based on online behaviour provide a passive audience experience, undermining users’ agency to curate the content they consume (chapter 5). These algorithms can drive emotions by determining the content users are exposed to.4 The best example is doomscrolling, a relatively new concept that describes the habitual search for negative news on social media. Once started, AI algorithms will automatically show doomscrollers more and more negative news and content. Doomscrolling is associated with lower indicators of mental wellbeing and life satisfaction.5 It can destroy relationships… AI- generated deepfakes in online cyberbullying and harassment among young people are on the rise and have already damaged relationships among peers. AI can generate realistic- looking images of a person and place them into fake settings.6 Cyberbullies have used deepfakes to superimpose images of teenagers into inappropriate set- tings, making it look as if they were nude, drinking underage and vaping.7 This purposefully misleading content can cause fear, helplessness, suicidal ideation and other mental health issues, especially among young women.8 The newly adopted Artificial Intelligence Act by the European Union promises regulation of deepfakes, which will have to be labelled as such, once fully implemented and enforced.9 and trigger mental health issues… The growing popularity of AI photo filters producing “thinspo” (inspirational images promoting an “ideal” body type) create unrealistic beauty standards and body dysmorphia. Together with discussion threads and AI- generated harm- ful information on overly restrictive diet plans, vomiting-i nducing drugs and other techniques, vulnerability to eating disorders has increased substantially. And although safety features are improving, so- called jailbreaks (inserting words and phrases to bypass safety features) still allow access to the most harmful content with relative ease.10 Discussions have also glamourized depression, suicide and other mental health issues.11 Subcultures and niche communities have emerged, using codewords to overcome flagging from social media platforms. In just 36 minutes, a bot that interacted with videos centred around depression was shown a TikTok feed where 93 percent of content was sad or depressive.12 Although most social media firms are making efforts to hide or delete potentially harmful posts, more work is needed to make them more effective. On average, only 15 percent of reported posts with suicidal or self- harm content are deleted, revealing widespread noncompliance with the EU Digital Services Act, which aims to protect young people from harmful content on social media.13 but has done so only for some young people so far So far, young people in many low- and middle-i ncome countries have been mostly spared these detrimental effects because internet use remains very limited (box figure 1).14 But if the current trend of swiftly increasing usage persists, it is only a matter of time until young people in these countries catch up (box figure 2). So, the harmful effects of social media on young people will also expand, most likely more than proportionally, because people with internet access in low- and middle- income countries spend more time on social media than their counterparts in high- income countries.15 There is thus a unique learning opportunity for lower-i ncome countries to skip some of the detrimental ef- fects of AI-powered social media by providing information about risks and guiding the purpose and frequency of use. (continued) CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 77 Box 3.3 Artificial intelligence on social media undermines agency and drives emotions— but only for some young people so far (continued) Box figure 1 Most young people in high- and Box figure 2 …but others will catch up soon if middle- income countries use the internet… trends persist Internet users (% of population ages 15–24) Internet users (% of population) 100 96.4 98.0 100 80 80 70.9 60 60 44.8 40 40 20 20 0 0 Low Lower Upper High 1990 2000 2010 2020 income middle middle income income income Latin America & Caribbean North America Europe & Central Asia South Asia Sub-Saharan Africa East Asia & Pacific Middle East & North Africa Note: Data are for the most recent year available. Source: Human Development Report Office using data from Source: Human Development Report Office using data from World Bank (2024a). ITU (2024b). Notes 1. Shah and Bilal 2022. 2. Walsh and others 2020. 3. US Office of the Surgeon General 2023. 4. Kang and Lou 2022. 5. Satici and others 2023. 6. Hinduja 2023. 7. Hinduja 2023. 8. Laffier and Rehman 2023. 9. European Parliament 2023a, 2023c. 10. Bahnweg 2023; CCDH 2023. 11. Ahuja and Fichadia 2024; Bahnweg and Omar 2023. 12. WSJ Staff 2021. 13. Tagesschau 2023. For more detailed information, see three studies carried out by Reset (2023). For more information on the Digital Services Act, see European Parliament (2023b). 14. ITU 2024b. 15. Datareportal 2024. limited to certain times of the day to avoid crowding curricula is key to empowering young people to ben- out healthier activities such as sports, music, creative efit from technological advancement, not suffer from and nature- based activities and in- person interaction it. Considering rapid technological change, curricula with friends and family.55 need to be constantly updated and teachers trained to cover the most recent developments — such as deep- fake images and AI- generated dialogues, which can Teach, fund and collaborate with the private sector be difficult to detect, even for adults.56 Policymakers could work on regulations for labelling AI- produced Empowering young people to use AI wisely and feel content. ownership of their digital experience is a challenge. In some cases, AI can help protect young people While schools and other educational institutions and their interactions in the digital space. For in- cannot control the content of apps or time spent on stance, an automated classification model can identi- smartphones outside school hours, they can double fy cyberbullying by analysing text on social media down on teaching responsible and metered use. In- with the help of a deep decision tree classifier.57 And cluding AI, algorithms and social media use in school plugins can educate young people on the critical and 78 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 responsible use of social media. Virtual learning Figure 3.6 Multidimensionally poor people with little companions can help young people detect risks and education lack access to the internet toxic content, building cybercourage and resilience.58 Creating universal access to these protective technol- Access to internet (% of population ages 19–64) ogies is an essential task for policymakers, working 80 closely with private companies. Public- private part- 70 nerships could help, as could subsidies for innovative 60.7 technologies. Funding with strings attached can in- 60 centivize the development of products that foster 50 young people’s wellbeing, especially when working with smaller tech companies and startups. 40 37.7 30 Semi- autonomous 20.4 20 17.0 adulthood — with overlapping identities 10 0 Following Amartya Sen’s concept of Nonpoor Poor Nonpoor Poor “plural identities,” people are not re- Higher levels of education Lower levels of education ducible to one single identity.59 They are employees or entrepreneurs, spouses or partners, consumers Note: To distinguish between nonpoor and poor individuals, each person is assigned a deprivation score based on their household’s lack of access to or vendors, friends or neighbours — and most like- 10 key indicators of the global Multidimensional Poverty Index. These scores ly combine these identities in different ways. So, are then summed to calculate the household’s overall deprivation score. If the score is 1/3 or higher, the household and everyone in it are considered their experience with and use of AI is also multifac- multidimensionally poor. Individuals with higher levels of education are those eted, as they act and interact in a variety of institu- who live in a household where at least one member who is of school entrance age plus six years or older has completed at least six years of schooling; indi- tional settings. For employers and entrepreneurs AI viduals with lower levels of education are those who live in a household where can boost productivity by either increasing product no member who is of school entrance age plus six years or older has com- pleted at least six years of schooling. The data are from household surveys innovation or making production processes more (Demographic and Health Surveys and Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys) that efficient but could put jobs at risk if there is a bias cover nearly 8.1 million individuals in 94 countries. Source: Human Development Report Office using data from UNDP (2024a). towards automation (chapter 6). Depending partly on policy choices, AI can either compromise or sup- port worker agency (spotlight 3.3). In their identity Agency under attack? as partners, adults may choose a relationship with AI over one with a human, casting a toll on mental well- A necessary condition for human development is being (box 3.4) and family structures. As consumers, that people can make choices aligned with their val- they may struggle with automated systems or face ues and beliefs and can act on them, a principle sum- identity theft or financial fraud facilitated by AI.60 marized in the concept of agency. When beliefs and And as parents, their digital behaviour shapes future values are formed more or less independently, they generations. The key here is that in all their identi- are authentic to that person (authenticity).61 If that ties people need to have choices to be able to act on person has the capacity and the authority for self- their beliefs and values (agency) to fully realize their government, we can speak of autonomy.62 And if that potential. person is then able to execute their autonomy and act Keep in mind that many adults still lack access to on their beliefs and values, we can speak of agency the internet. While some AI- powered apps can be (figure 3.7). Just as individual conversion factors de- used without internet access, the most common termine how resources are transformed into capabili- ones that are accessible in a massified way, such ties and functionings,63 conversion factors also shape as AI- powered chatbots, require stable broadband how authenticity and autonomy are translated into connections — an option that many poor people with agency.64 Agency is key to human dignity — and essen- low levels of education lack (figure 3.6). tial for public reasoning. CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 79 Figure 3.7 Disentangling autonomy, authenticity and In the case of large language models, there is evidence agency in the digital space that the data used in pretraining and the finetuning that happens afterward lead the models to behave culturally in ways that mimic the models’ places of origin.71 And Agency what happens if these platforms are instrumentalized People have choices and are able to act for geopolitical interests,72 affecting millions of individ- upon their beliefs uals’ income opportunities and wellbeing? and values Some technology firms intentionally design apps to create a sense of control over the scrolling experience by ensuring that interactive elements remain familiar Conversion factors and predictable.73 Although this illusionary agency is meant to increase user satisfaction, one of its side Authenticity Autonomy effects is that it facilitates masked manipulation. For Formation of beliefs, Ability and authority values, motivations, instance, it makes it easier for certain political groups of self-government and reasons to diffuse extremist viewpoints, which can under- mine democratic processes. And even though some Source: Human Development Report Office. ethical principles may be applied in some countries or regions — as with the Ethics Guidelines for Trustwor- Even in the real world, beliefs and values are not thy AI from the European Commission74 or the decla- entirely independent but a result of individual and ration on the manipulative capabilities of algorithmic public reasoning, socialization and adaptive prefer- processes of the European Council75 — the blurry lines ences, among others.65 How much authenticity, au- between persuasion and manipulation make it diffi- tonomy and agency does the digital space allow for? cult to distinguish one from the other.76 At the same Are we not more easily steerable now that we are con- time there is evidence that some of these regulations stantly connected and available for suggestions about shape the behaviour of the firms behind these digital what to believe, like or deem important? The digital platforms globally.77 Still, authenticity and autonomy space adds a layer of complexity to the analysis of this are threatened and often curtailed in the digital space critical aspect of human development (see the dis- under the current configuration of AI algorithms, par- cussion of agenticity in chapter 2). ticularly recommender systems (chapter 5). And they Recommender systems in digital platforms use in- are considered subordinates of agency, endangering dividuals’ online actions to fuel recommendations one of the key aspects of human development in an that guide people to content or products. When these environment that for many adults takes up a large AI algorithms are optimized for engagement, they tai- part of their day- to-day life. lor marketing efforts to encourage people to purchase particular products or stay on the platform.66 These systems are taking greater control over several areas Exclusion, discrimination and frustration of life.67 Through suggestions on whom to follow on through AI- powered systems X, date on Tinder or work with on LinkedIn and on what book to read, movie to watch or music to listen AI is increasingly used for customer service, seeming- to, AI influences the culture, work, information and ly for human convenience but often to automate tasks people we are exposed to.68 As AI is currently imple- previously done by humans in large enterprises. “So-s o mented, its influence on human authenticity is com- AI”78 does not outperform humans, but driven by either pounded by the dearth of explainability of AI- generated hype or cost- cutting pressures, it results in job destruc- decisionmaking and content.69 Some even expect that tion with no gains in productivity.79 Social interaction cultural evolution will be shaped by machines—that is at the core of these jobs, with social skills and rela- is, by a small set of large firms with the same cultural tionships important for problem solving.80 While cus- background—given their power to influence social net- tomers appreciate the efficiency and round-t he-clock works, information flows and cultural consumption.70 availability of AI-p owered customer service chatbots, 80 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Box 3.4 Harmful friends without benefits More and more people have established emotional relationships with artificial intelligence (AI)–powered characters. These characters are constructed to validate users without disagreement, providing emotional and intimate support within seconds.1 Users perceive the characters — which are really sophisticated chatbots as friendly and accepting peers who are constantly available to provide validation, praise and companionship.2 The result may be an attach- ment to an artificial nonempathetic agent whose reactions mostly reflect the user’s emotions but are out of the user’s control.3 Since unsatisfied social needs are often the underlying motive for engaging with AI-p owered characters, socially vulnerable people are more likely to use these products, which hinder personal growth and can lead to vicious cycles of deteriorating social isolation and poor mental wellbeing.4 AI-p owered characters are used not only as friends but also as romantic partners in video games (some downloaded more than 10 million times and others with more than 660 million users).5 These games can produce unrealistic ex- pectations about relationships with a flawless partner and may lead to the rejection of imperfect human relationships.6 As people invest considerable time and energy into their seemingly perfect relationships with AI-p owered charac- ters, imperfect human relationships can be neglected or even rejected.7 Some 25 percent of people who regularly interact with these characters report less interest in forming human relationships.8 This not only erodes people’s ability to nurture relationships but also leads to feelings of detachment and alienation from the human community9 — with 18 percent of frequent users of these features reporting increased loneliness and isolation, even though they perceive a sense of companionship.10 Since apps with AI- powered characters tend to come and go from the market, and electricity or devices may not always be available, it is alarming that users report that their mental wellbeing would suffer if certain apps were to disappear.11 Experts also see potential for addiction;12 indeed, 32 percent of frequent users show symptoms consistent with behavioural addiction.13 The biggest contributor to addiction is the experience of conversational flow and attach- ment, which is generated by AI’s perceived intelligence, interactivity, personalization and human-l ike responses.14 There has already been at least one reported teenage suicide related to a synthetic relationship. The AI-p owered character indirectly supported the idea of pulling the trigger of the gun.15 This sad example highlights the danger of emo- tional bubbles— t he false impression that personal emotions are externally validated— w hich is one of the core differences from relationships among humans.16 It also illustrates the alignment problem explained in chapter 2. Programs and apps need regulation that protects users from false expectations, such as repeated warnings and reminders that users are interacting with a nonhuman entity. Age restrictions should apply, given the increased vulnerability of younger people.17 Notes 1. Skjuve and others 2021. 2. Maples and others 2024; Marriott and Pitardi 2024. 3. Mlonyeni 2024; Zimmerman, Janhonen and Beer 2023. 4. Mlonyeni 2024; Pentina and others 2023. 5. Lu- Hai Liang 2019; Xu 2021; Zhou and others 2020. 6. Berger 2024. 7. Zimmerman, Janhonen and Beer 2023. 8. Berger 2024. 9. Boine 2023. 10. Lafortune, Dubé and Lapointe 2024; Li and Zhang 2024. 11. Marriott and Pitardi 2024; Skjuve and others 2021. 12. Xie and Pentina 2022. 13. Berger 2024. 14. Zhou and Zhang 2024. 15. Roose 2024. 16. Mlonyeni 2024. 17. Most users of relationship apps such as Replika are adults (Altchek 2024). they find the perceived inability to manage complex re- So, while at first sight, AI reduces costs, it can ul- quests and the obligation to interact with a virtual agent timately damage a company’s reputation. The out- when undesired to be substantial drawbacks.81 Survey look does not seem promising: in 2024, 85 percent data suggest that 80 percent of customers have been of call centre managers in the United Kingdom and frustrated after interacting with a chatbot instead of a the United States that did not already have an auto- human agent and that chatbots resolved only 22 per- mated system planned to implement one.84 This will cent of customers’ issues (figure 3.8). All others had also have profound consequences for many middle- to connect with a human agent later.82 Once a human income countries that rely on call centres for employ- is brought into the loop after a long series of menus, ment opportunities.85 In contrast, using AI to support customers are likely to release their frustration on the and augment what customer service agents do, as op- representative and provide less information, hindering posed to replacing them, can enhance customer satis- resolution.83 Throughout the whole process company– faction (chapter 1). customer relations suffer, which often results in a less But digitalization and AI also affect customers in positive evaluation of the company. other areas of their daily lives: restaurants where CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 81 Figure 3.8 Automated systems may cut costs but distress customers 20% 22% Satisfied Issues resolved/ gave up 80% 78% Frustrated Need to connect with human Source: Human Development Report Office using data from Westfall (2022). patrons must order using their phone to scan a QR prices and at the cost of discriminating against cer- code rather than through a server, travel reservations tain groups. Companies cut labour costs without in- booked and checked in for online and self- checkouts creasing value for customers, decreasing prices or in grocery stores. improving general welfare. Even when these systems are convenient for some More detailed attention to customer satisfaction is average- age healthy people, they can be a consider- needed, so that digitalization and AI can truly bene- able obstacle for others, including illiterate, visually fit companies and customers alike. Using AI to aug- impaired or mentally disabled people, people with ment rather than replace people when opportunities passport restrictions, people of colour (when using fa- for complementarity exist would be a more produc- cial recognition technology), mothers or fathers with tive way of deploying AI (chapters 1, 2 and 6). Public- small children, and people who lack digital skills. private partnerships could help develop inclusive For instance, despite advances in online booking solutions that offer opportunities for AI augmenta- systems, 53 percent of travellers from the European tion, without longer lines or wait times when choos- Union, India and the United States reported needing ing to interact with a human. assistance with some or all parts of the booking pro- cess.86 Moreover, people living with disabilities may face difficulties with online check- in and seat selec- Caregivers shape the digital generation tion, as well as inaccessible check- in machines and amid fragmented institutions digital information screens. Screens sometimes lack features such as text- to-speech or adjustable height Some parents and caregivers consciously teach their for wheelchair users. And advanced imaging technol- children the responsible use of digital technologies. ogy with automated target recognition systems shows But even those who do not are role models for their a higher false alarm rate for Black people (particularly children, unintendedly passing on usage patterns, women), people of East Asian descent, women, older emotional reactions to consumed content and ap- adults, overweight and obese passengers, and pas- propriate interaction with nonhuman actors.88 The sengers wearing turbans or wigs.87 current adult generation is thus shaping a whole new The question here is who benefits from the use of symbiotic interplay between humans and machines. digital technology. Right now, substantial service In some countries caregivers lack the skills and tasks are passed on to customers — without reducing experience to teach children the responsible use of 82 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 digital technology, in part because they have not had older people who do use them appear less susceptible access to it or because digital technologies, particu- to drawbacks such as social comparison or addictive larly AI, are changing rapidly. In six African countries features, since their cognitive and brain develop- 40 percent of children have never received any ad- ment has already concluded. So, they can more fully vice or guidance from caregivers on how to safely use enjoy the benefits of digital technologies, including the internet. That is partly because their caregivers enhanced social interaction with distant friends and do not use the internet, as in Ethiopia, where usage family and features such as telehealth. among caregivers is as low as 18 percent.89 In other regions of the world, children must com- pete with technology for their parents’ or caregivers’ Older people need training, access and options attention. Parents who are using their phone are five times less likely than those who are not to respond One of the biggest challenges is that many older adults to their children’s request for attention. And when are largely unfamiliar with the newest AI technologies. parents respond while using their phone, reactions Fewer than half of people ages 60 and older have used are delayed, less affectionate and less focused on the AI- powered tools such as ChatGPT, Google Gemini children’s needs.90 or Microsoft Copilot.92 The proportion of older people This is where institutions come into play again. Dur- who are internet users is lower than the proportion of ing the adult stage of life, the institutional grasp on all other age groups (figure 3.9). In Canada 99 percent people is not as direct as during school age, with adults of people ages 15–24 are internet users, compared with embedded in several institutions, sometimes at the 72 percent of people ages 75 and older. In Côte d’Ivo- same time. Employees are part of their company. Par- ire, France, Japan and Mexico over 95 percent of young ents may be involved in their children’s schools. People people use the internet, compared with around 50 per- who actively participate in their community may fre- cent of people ages 75 and older. quently visit community spaces such as public librar- The frailer older people become, the less they use ies. So, government campaigns, community places, the internet and related products and services.93 De- parent associations and workplaces need to transmit clining cognitive functioning is strongly related to sufficient knowledge and awareness that people can less internet use. Self- perception is also key here: make informed choices aligned with their beliefs and when older people feel more competent, they use the values. Only if people maintain a degree of autonomy internet more frequently, particularly for banking, and authenticity can they exercise their agency. shopping, searching for information and contacting friends, acquaintances and relatives.94 Older age — trained, To the contrary, when older people perceive that empowered and learning new skills at an advanced age is counter- healthier? productive, self- doubt and anxiety are generated, impeding them from taking on training or venturing The global population is rapidly age- into new technologies.95 And since most older people ing, with about 1.4 billion people ages spend their time outside formal economic or political 60 and older expected by 2030.91 As medical care im- institutions, it is more difficult to transmit skills and proves and life expectancies increase, more people knowledge through trainings at a large scale. than ever before are elderly. At the same time digi- Many digital natives (younger people born in coun- tal technology is rapidly advancing, with new digi- tries with ample access to digital technologies) have tal devices, software and services created every day. not only the relevant skills but also different attitudes, This combination of ageing population and rapid in- characterized by more trust, less concern and more novations in digitalization, including AI, poses some hopefulness than older people.96 Fewer than half of challenges but also opportunities. Few older people older people think that AI-p owered products and ser- are using advanced digital technologies yet, mostly vices have more benefits than drawbacks, compared because they either lack access or are unfamiliar and with more than 60 percent of younger people.97 And insecure with them, sometimes fearing fraud. But more than 80 percent of older people are concerned CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 83 Figure 3.9 Very little internet use among older people 400 350 300 250 200 150 100 50 0 Ages 14 and under Ages 15–24 Ages 25–75 Ages 76 and older that AI can figure out people’s thoughts and make people with limited physical mobility can leverage decisions for them.98 As a result, younger people are digital tools to sustain their social networks and con- much more inclined to use what digital technology nections, benefiting their overall wellbeing. They has to offer, as reflected in the use gap. increasingly use video calls, social media and web- Even so, there is considerable variation in internet based communities to stay connected with family use among older adults across countries at different and friends near and far. They are most likely to do so HDI levels (figure 3.10). Older people in low, medi- when their partners, friends and family help get them um and high HDI countries use the internet less than started or updated. This in turn can strengthen bonds older people in very high HDI countries,99 limiting across generations.101 their ability to benefit from a wide range of internet- Older people can seem more vulnerable to online based services, such as telehealth, social media plat- fraud, and data shows they are worried about it.102 But forms and online shopping, that could enhance their some studies show that they are actually less likely independence and social engagement. than younger people to fall victim to it, which might The Covid- 19 pandemic highlighted the double simply be because older people spend less time on- burden of digital and social exclusion that many older line.103 When they do fall victim, they are more likely people faced during lockdowns. Older people who to experience financial loss, which can be repetitive.104 lacked access to digital technologies or the skills to When telephone fraud such as phishing and spoofing use them were effectively cut off from some essen- is included, older people are the most affected, with tial services such as telehealth and online shopping, more than double the total financial loss of other age and they faced greater risk of social isolation.100 Par- groups.105 Reported fraud increased by 14 percent adoxically, digital technologies can enhance social from 2023 to 2024, possibly due to new generative AI- inclusion among older people. For instance, older powered tools that use voice cloning in scam calls.106 84 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 ainemrA lizarB adanaC aibmoloC aciR atsoC eriovI’d etôC aihcezC dnalniF ecnarF )RAS( anihC ,gnoK gnoH aisenodnI qarI napaJ natshkazaK aisyalaM sevidlaM ocixeM yaugaraP ureP nedewS dnaliahT yaugurU natsikebzU Internet users (%) Note: Data on internet use among individuals younger than age 15 are unavailable for Canada, Czechia, Finland, France, Malaysia, Sweden and Uruguay. The maximum value of 400 reflects the figure’s structure as a stacked bar graph. Each bar includes four segments reflecting the percentage values for four age categories in each country. Because each age group contributes a maximum of 100 percent, the total for any given country cannot exceed 400. Source: Human Development Report Office using data from ITU (2024a). Figure 3.10 Stark variance in internet use among older people across countries with different Human Development Index levels 100 80 60 40 20 0 But overall, younger people are more susceptible to can also analyse patterns and meanings in speech or the harmful psychological aspects of digital technol- text, recognize disease associations and identify tar- ogies, reporting more feelings of distress, while older gets for repurposing drugs. These developments im- people appear to have matured enough to be less af- prove the early and accurate detection of complex fected by them (figure 3.11). and life- threatening conditions and facilitate timely Adults in the older age group tend to have high pur- interventions. Key opportunity areas include: chasing power. Older people in the United States could • AI- powered wearables and signal processing devic- spend an estimated $26.8 trillion on digital technolo- es can enhance real- time diagnostics and anomaly gy by 2050.107 But many apps and devices overlook the detection, making it easier to identify health issues physical and cognitive challenges older people face. early.109 During the Covid- 19 pandemic, telehealth Product development should ensure options tailored services surged in many parts of the world, and to their needs and abilities. Public- private partner- were especially attractive for older people in ships can help align people’s needs with companies’ the United States, where more than 40 percent quests for technological progress, growth and profit. engaged in video consultations with healthcare Because many older people prefer targeted training providers.110 The trend has lasted, still generating before using new digital technologies,108 companies political debate about insurance coverage several should offer human support options. years later111 and the promise of expanding access to healthcare, as telehealth facilitates services for people with limited mobility, including in rural and Bias and promise for older people’s health remote areas. • Many older adults require comprehensive health Fascinating innovations are under way to augment and social care services112 but frequently receive human services in the health sector. AI can help de- fragmented care.113 Coordination between health tect subtle patterns in medical images and videos. It and social care can be improved by integrating data CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 85 sevidlaM nedewS adanaC )RAS( anihC ,gnoK gnoH aisyalaM dnalniF napaJ ecnarF yaugurU natshkazaK dnaliahT lizarB qarI aibmoloC natsikebzU ocixeM yaugaraP ureP eriovI’d etôC aisenodnI Internet users (% of population ages 75 and older) Source: Human Development Report Office using data from ITU (2024a). Figure 3.11 Across world regions older people who use the internet are less distressed than younger ones Share of population experiencing distress (%) 50 40 30 20 10 0 Global North Western Middle East Oceania Latin America Sub-Saharan South Asia America Europe and North Africa and Caribbean Africa 18–24 25–34 35–44 45–54 55–64 65–74 75 and older Note: Sample sizes vary by region (between 2,000 and 50,000 internet users). Distress is measured by a mental health indicator that captures 47 items based on a comprehensive coding of mental health symptoms assessed across 126 mental health questionnaires (including the Patient Health Questionnaire- 9) and interviews, spanning 10 mental health disorders, as well as items derived from the Research Domain Criteria initiative of the US National Institute of Mental Health. Each item is rated by respondents using a Likert scale with nine options that reflect the item’s impact on their abil- ity to function. The ratings are aggregated into the Mental Health Quotient score, which positions individuals in one of six categories from distressed to thriving. Source: Human Development Report Office using data from Thiagarajan, Newson and Swaminathan (2025). across health records, ensuring more coherent care. train AI models. Only about 26 percent of AI mod- Since disease burdens, functional abilities, care els include age- specific data, and even those that do needs and priorities vary widely among individuals, contain little information on individuals ages 85 and AI can help establish profiles of health needs and older.120 Biases — particularly in representation and predict specific interventions in close coordination evaluation — are introduced at several stages, most with medical staff.114 But privacy must be protected. frequently in the data- to-algorithm phase and the • Preventive care and early disease detection can algorithm- to-user phase.121 be augmented through AI- powered technology. Underrepresentation, together with social or AI- assisted radiologists interpret chest X- rays for human bias and discrimination in algorithms, can tuberculosis, mammograms to detect breast cancer disadvantage older adults in healthcare access, treat- and nodules in lung cancer patients in countries ment and outcomes (figure 3.12).122 Including older as diverse as India, Japan and the United States.115 adults and their specific needs in developing and AI- powered systems have increased breast cancer training AI models for the health sector is essential detection by 29 percent (with a false- positive rate for improving services and making them work for similar to standard double reading), reducing the people of all ages. screen- reading workload by 44 percent.116 AI is also used for early stroke prediction and for analysing Multistakeholder action patients’ acoustic and facial expressions to detect for people- centred AI Parkinson’s disease.117 Any abnormal movement of a patient triggers an alert and eventually helps As AI continues to reshape daily lives, our interactions humans make a diagnosis.118 with it grow increasingly complex. The life- stage per- But the use of AI in the health sector is not free of spective helps disentangle risks from benefits and problems. Older people use the healthcare system challenges from opportunities, identifying areas for more frequently than people in younger age groups119 action by multiple stakeholders in society. Since AI but are often underrepresented in the datasets that is penetrating virtually all areas of people’s lives (and 86 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure 3.12 Social, algorithmic and data- driven biases in older people’s healthcare BIASED SAMPLES DATA-DRIVEN BIAS DATA GAPS NETWORK TRAINING IMBALANCED CLASSES ALGORITHMIC BIAS BIASED OUTPUT TRAINING BIAS SOCIETAL PREJUDICES HUMAN BIAS POWER IMBALANCES Source: Norori and others 2021. spreading around the world), governments alone Figure 3.13 Harnessing artificial intelligence (AI) for human cannot make AI work for human development. Col- development — invest, inform, include laboration among economic, political and social in- stitutions will help develop and manage AI- powered products and services in ways that expand capabili- INVEST ties and enhance human development. Governments in universal access to electricity, can serve an umbrella function, orchestrating differ- internet, devices ent actors. and digital skills fra T m h e r w ee o rk p — il c la a r p s a b o ili f t ie t s h , e f un h c u t m io a n n in g d s e a v n e d lo a p g m en e c n y t TI E S A G — d A t s c a h o i n e I s c e I n v d e s n a y e h t v n v t l o c o o a e h a c u l s p v e n u o t l m a i i d e n r n d l s u e n h g a o ) e n e . e g ) i t , c n l e ( p d t w ( n u fi e A p c h n g v e y I a u i e o v t w r ( l p e o b t e i h l r p t e e 3 s h e i a . t e n y 1 h l a x 3 g a e c ) p p c a . a f a e c n F u b n e o o n l b d s p e l c s e l l t t o e t t h i o o w o o - e r c n i e i a e n b r i l c n n e g e c t t g c a c t r o t s o p h e r n m a t a i d h c b t t i e e a i h f t l ) y p r y i e a t , a p h i i m i r n e r n a o s d b e v t a e ( w e e e c w r l x h o r n i h e e e r e t a a k f r t o s - - t , , e a h n b a a IN r o b n u l F e e t O s h c s h o R A o w M I i c C t t A P e o o A B s I L I H U M F U A N N C D A T I E I F V O O E N L R I N O G P S M E N T E N C a Y s p n o t d o a f I l N k i A d c e e I C y h v p d L o e r i U o l l a d o d l D e p o u r m g E c s u t e i s e n n t devices123 and digital skills can endow individuals with technological resources (for most AI applica- tions) and the skills to use them, expanding their ca- Source: Human Development Report Office. pabilities. Informing people about how to harness AI to develop the functionings they have reason to value agency. And firms need to be included in policy dia- will allow them to make educated choices about logues on how to make AI work for people. when and how to use it. Including people of all ages, Urging all stakeholders to double down on the three genders, ethnicities and backgrounds in designing I’s (invest, inform, include), connecting AI to the three and developing AI products will reflect their diverse pillars of human development, will expand human free- beliefs and values, allowing them to exercise their doms and enable people to fully realize their potential. CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 87 SPOTLIGHT 3.1 The decline in young people’s mental wellbeing in some parts of the world Human Development Report Office; David G. Blanchflower, Dartmouth College; Alex Bryson, University College London; Tara Thiagarajan, Sapien Labs; Jennifer Newson, Sapien Labs Until recently, one of the well- established empirical depression and loneliness.7 Intense smartphone use regularities in the social sciences was that subjective and deteriorating wellbeing among young people measures of wellbeing (such as happiness) followed could be linked through a range of mechanisms (box a U- shaped pattern with age: younger and older peo- S3.1.1), including constant social comparison8 and cy- ple reported higher wellbeing than those in middle berbullying.9 Poor sleep quality, driven by addictive age (late 40s to early 50s).1 Conversely, illbeing (such features, can further impair wellbeing, and the shift as despair) followed an inverted- U pattern with age. from in- person to digital interactions seems to have This empirical regularity was reported in more than delayed social and emotional development, increas- 600 published papers documenting its presence in ing feelings of isolation.10 Also under investigation about 145 countries at all income levels.2 is whether something intrinsic to social media use But around the end of the first decade of the 21st is harmful or whether harms emanate from the rec- century, this empirical regularity started to unrav- ommender systems in digital platforms optimized for el, according to a variety of metrics in some parts of engagement.11 Other factors might have also contrib- the world — particularly in very high Human Devel- uted to this dramatic change. A better understanding opment Index (HDI) countries.3 In the United States of mental health issues has led to less stigma, more wellbeing, measured by life satisfaction, now increas- use of mental health services and thus higher report- es continuously with age (top panel of figure S3.1.1), ing rates.12 Reduced independence and free play have and reported despair is higher among young people weakened coping skills,13 while overprotection and (bottom panel of figure S3.1.1).4 the rise of “safetyism” are making young people more Another important change is the difference in the vulnerable to distress.14 rate of deterioration in wellbeing between young Smartphones came to prominence in many coun- women and young men. While young women have tries around the time that mental wellbeing among historically reported higher despair than young men young people began to decline.15 The rise in poor in the United States and both groups have reported in- mental health among young people precedes the creased despair since around 2010, the rate of increase Covid- 19 pandemic by some years, though the pan- has been higher for younger women (figure S3.1.2). demic may have exacerbated the trend.16 Some stud- Although results depend, in part, on the types of ies suggest the trend goes all the way back to the late questions and survey methods,5 the decline in young 1990s,17 whereas other studies emphasize the uptick people’s mental wellbeing does not appear to be uni- in mental illbeing from around 2011.18 versal. For example, there is little evidence that the How widespread is this change, and is it really age structure of wellbeing has changed in Africa over caused by excessive smartphone use? the past decade.6 The shift is not consistent across all datasets or Researchers and policymakers are still trying to across all dimensions of subjective wellbeing.19 It is determine the reasons behind the changes in some particularly evident in some very high HDI coun- countries and the seeming lack thereof in others. tries20 and less pronounced or nonexistent in lower The figures below show that where changes in the HDI countries (with a few exceptions, such as specific wellbeing curve have occurred, they parallel great- surveys in Mexico).21 This information is telling, con- er smartphone use, leading to hypotheses that some sidering that most young people in low- income coun- of the documented negative effects of excessive so- tries are not yet using the internet (see box figure 1 cial media use could be driving increases in anxiety, in box 3.3 in the chapter). And detailed case studies 88 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure S3.1.1 Declining wellbeing, rising despair among young people in the United States Mean wellbeing score 3.5 3.4 3.3 3.2 3.1 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 75 Age (years) 2005–2010 2022–2023 Share of people reporting despair (%) 10 8 6 4 2 0 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 48 50 52 54 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 75 Age (years) 2006–2018 2019–2024 Note: Mean wellbeing scores are based on responses to the question, “In general, how satisfied are you with your life?” Responses were given on a four-s tep scale (very dissatisfied = 1, dissatisfied = 2, satisfied = 3 and very satisfied = 4). Share of young people reporting despair is the percentage of young people who responded 30 to the question, “Now thinking about your mental health — which includes stress, depression and problems with emotions — for how many days during the past 30 days was your mental health not good?” Source: Blanchflower and Bryson (2024c) using data from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 89 Figure S3.1.2 Increase in despair in the United States since 2010, especially among women Share of people reporting despair (%) 12 10 8 6 4 2 1993 1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 Age 35–54 Females age < 25 Males age < 25 Source: Blanchflower 2025b. Box S3.1.1 Connected or disconnected? Exploring possible mechanisms between smartphones and mental wellbeing Social comparison. Wellbeing is determined not only by what people have but also by how much they think they have relative to others. Well-e stablished in the literature on income and earnings,1 this extends more broadly to other set- tings, such as friendship groups and social activity. Smartphones provide regular updates on how others are doing, and young people may perceive their own world as lacking.2 Direct impact on brain function. The addictive effect of smartphones is akin to the user returning continually for another “fix,” creating a dopamine response in the brain. Smartphone use can then become an end in itself, with the wellbeing response dependent on more intensive usage. The links between smartphone dependency and mental wellbeing are yet to be fully established, but smartphone addiction could have adverse impacts on behaviours and response mechanisms.3 Displacement. The addictive component may cause smartphone use to replace other activities more conducive to mental and physical health, such as maintaining “real” social networks and engaging in social activities outside the home, such as sport and art.4 Information overload. Relying on smartphones to perform numerous functions increases screen interaction. For some people, especially young ones,5 some applications can result in information overload, which can be overwhelming and produce anxiety and stress.6 Cyberbullying. The internet extends into a virtual world that is difficult to police. So, smartphone users can be subject to intimidation and bullying, often continually in real time, making it difficult to “hide.” This could have a direct adverse impact on individual wellbeing.7 Notes 1. UNDP 2019. 2. Aubry, Quiamzade and Meier 2024; Braghieri, Levy and Makarin 2022; Faelens and others 2021; Irmer and Schmiedek 2023; McComb, Vanman and Tobin 2023. 3. Lembke 2021. 4. Bone and others 2022; Fluharty and others 2023. 5. Benselin and Ragsdell 2016. 6. Bawden and Robinson 2020; Matthes and others 2020. 7. Peebles 2014; Thiagarajan, Newson and Swaminathan 2025; Zhu and others 2021. 90 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 have found an association between diffusion of the The age at which young people first own a internet and deterioration in young people’s mental smartphone appears to matter. Among 18- to wellbeing.22 24- year-olds today, those who had a smartphone be- The story becomes even clearer in a global survey fore age 13 show significantly worse mental wellbeing that includes only people with internet access. Al- and a higher likelihood of being distressed or strug- though the survey samples were not representative gling than those who received their first smartphone of the population, in every country that participat- later (top panels in figure S3.1.4). The effects are most ed, across all regions, mental wellbeing is lowest for pronounced among women and young people who young adults and increases with age (figure S3.1.3). first owned a smartphone at age 5 or 6. Nearly 70 per- Among the global internet- enabled population, cent of young women and 50 percent of young men 45 percent of young people ages 18–24 struggle with responding to the survey now report distress and mental wellbeing at a level that has functional conse- struggling. By contrast, among those who first owned quences and with symptomatic distress that would be a smartphone at age 13, the values drop to 51 percent considered of clinical concern.23 for women and 38 percent for men. The most affected areas are the social self — a di- mension of wellbeing that reflects self- perception Figure S3.1.3 Young internet users are struggling and the ability to relate to others — and mood and everywhere outlook. The younger the age at first smartphone ownership, the greater the decline in this funda- mental aspect of mental wellbeing (bottom panels in Average Mental Health Quotient score figure S3.1.4). The relationship between age at first smartphone 140 ownership and mental wellbeing is visible in 120 internet- enabled survey respondents across all countries and regions. It appears for both young 100 men and young women but is much stronger for 80 women. Women not only experience a greater drop in wellbeing with younger ages of smartphone own- 60 ership but also consistently have lower wellbeing 40 than men overall. As digital technologies play a larger role in child- 20 hood and adolescence and AI- powered applications 0 widen their reach, these findings underscore the need 18–24 25–34 35–44 45–54 55–64 65–74 75 and for deeper reflection about the specific mechanisms older Age group (years) that cause harm, the risks associated with current AI applications (for instance, recommender systems North America Latin America optimized for engagement based on online behav- Western Europe South Asia iour) and the potential for drawing on the new affor- Sub-Saharan Africa Oceania dances of AI, along with other measures, to mitigate Middle East and North Africa the risks of harm. This agenda, crucial everywhere, Note: The MHQ score encompasses 47 aspects of mental function assessed is important particularly in countries and settings on a life impact scale that spans six dimensions: Adaptability and Resilience, where digital technologies have not yet diffused as Cognition, Mind-B ody Connection, Mood and Outlook, and Social Self. Higher values indicate better perceived mental wellbeing. The survey was conducted widely, so that societies can be ahead of the curve during 2020–2024. and harness these technologies to advance human Source: Thiagarajan, Newson and Swaminathan (2025) using data from the Global Mind Project at Sapien Labs. development instead of hindering it. CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 91 Figure S3.1.4 The age at first smartphone ownership appears to matter for mental wellbeing Average Mental Health Quotient score, Share of young people ages 18–24 all young people ages 18–24 reporting distressa (%) 50 100 40 80 30 60 20 10 40 0 20 –10 –20 0 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Age at first smartphone ownership (years) Age at first smartphone ownership (years) Female Male Average Mental Health Quotient score, Average Mental Health Quotient score, young women ages 18–24 young men ages 18–24 80 80 70 70 60 60 50 50 40 40 30 30 20 20 10 10 0 0 –10 –10 –20 –20 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 Age at first smartphone ownership (years) Age at first smartphone ownership (years) Cognition Social self Adaptability & resilience Drive & motivation Mood & outlook Mind-body connection a. Distress is indicated by a Mental Health Quotient score below 0. Note: The MHQ score encompasses 47 aspects of mental function assessed on a life impact scale that spans six dimensions: Adaptability and Resil- ience, Cognition, Mind- Body Connection, Mood and Outlook, and Social Self. Higher values indicate better perceived mental wellbeing. The survey was conducted during 2020–2024. Source: Thiagarajan, Newson and Swaminathan (2025) using data from the Global Mind Project at Sapien Labs. 92 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 NOTES 1. Blanchflower 2021. 11. Lewandowsky, Robertson and DiResta 2024. The purpose of social media use (to access information, to seek entertainment or to express oneself) 2. Blanchflower 2025b. also matters (Qiao, Liu and Xu 2024). 3. Blanchflower, Bryson and Xu 2024. 12. Corredor- Waldron and Currie 2024. 4. Twenge and Blanchflower 2025. 13. Haidt 2024. 5. Blanchflower 2025a. 14. Lukianoff and Haidt 2019. Evidence is from the United States. 6. Blanchflower and Bryson 2024b. 15. Blanchflower 2025a; Blanchflower and Bryson 2024c; Blanchflower and 7. Social media can amplify outrage, status seeking and group conflict but others 2024. also has the potential to support prosociality and collective action (Van 16. Blanchflower, Bryson and Bell 2024. This seems to be the case for the Bavel and others 2024). Its use can have some benefits, such as enabling United Kingdom but not for the United States (Blanchflower, Bryson and people to access more targeted content, goods and services that cater to Xu 2024). their interests, facilitating access to the labour market by recent college graduates (Armona 2023) and enabling greater opportunities for expres- 17. Blanchflower, Bryson and Bell 2024. sion and for creators to disseminate their work (Aridor and others 2024). 18. Blanchflower, Bryson and Xu 2024. 8. Aubry, Quiamzade and Meier 2024. 19. Blanchflower and Bryson 2025. 9. Blanchflower and Bryson 2024a. 20. Twenge and Blanchflower 2025. 10. Braghieri, Levy and Makarin 2022; Carter and others 2024; Faelens and 21. Blanchflower and Bryson 2024b, 2024c, 2025. others 2021; Huang and others 2023; Irmer and Schmiedek 2023; Khalaf and others 2023; McComb, Vanman and Tobin 2023; Stuart and Scott 22. For the case of Italy, see Donati and others (2022). 2021; Scott, Stuart and Barber 2021, 2022; Twenge and others 2020. 23. Thiagarajan, Newson and Swaminathan 2025. CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 93 SPOTLIGHT 3.2 The social media trap Leonardo Bursztyn, University of Chicago; Benjamin Handel, University of California, Berkeley; Rafael Jimenez Duran, Bocconi University; Christopher Roth, University of Cologne In recent years the mental health crisis among teen- Figure S3.2.1 Respondents who prefer to live in a world agers and young adults has become increasingly without the platform concerning. Social media platforms, while serving as tools for connection and communication, have Share of respondents (%) been linked to feelings of anxiety, depression and 100 loneliness among teenagers and young adults.1 This has sparked a policy debate surrounding the poten- tial regulation, or even outright prohibition, of so- 80 cial media platforms. In May 2023 the US Surgeon 58 57 General pushed for a better understanding of the 60 57 possible “harm to the mental health and well- being of children and adolescents” from social media, as 40 33 well as the impact of stricter limits and standards for use.2 In late 2024 the government of Australia intro- 20 duced a general ban on social media for users under age 16.3 0 The policy debate around social media critically Instagram TikTok hinges on welfare estimates of social media products: All respondents Users what is the value of social media to its users? Some platforms such as Instagram and TikTok are Note: Error bars represent 95 percent confidence intervals. extremely popular among young people, to the point Source: Bursztyn and others 2023. that it can be very painful to stay off the platforms. Not using them would lead to tremendous fear of deactivating the respondent’s account for four weeks, missing out and potential exclusion from many so- which delivers the standard measure of individual cial interactions. Could large numbers of young users consumer surplus. The remaining scenarios shrink of these platforms not want to stop using them while the size of the respondents’ social media networks by also preferring to ban them? In other words, is there a introducing the possibility of collective deactivation, social media trap?4 where all students on campus who are participating in One way to answer this important question is to ask the experiment would also deactivate their accounts. young Instagram and TikTok users if they would pre- Such collective deactivation would be implemented if fer to live in a world with or without these platforms. the researchers recruited two- thirds of the students Among a sample of just over 1,000 US college stu- at the college for the experiment. The second scenar- dents, over 55 percent of Instagram users and 33 per- io (called “Valuation removing network”) measures cent of TikTok users would prefer to live in a world individual willingness to deactivate conditional on where the platform did not exist (figure S3.2.1). all other participating students having been asked to Moving beyond just asking survey questions, an do so, in exchange for monetary compensation. The experiment with the same sample of college stu- third (called “Product market valuation”) measures dents uses financial incentives to infer their valua- whether individuals are willing to forgo payment or tion of four scenarios involving the platforms. The instead require a payment to deactivate all participat- first scenario (called “Valuation keeping network”) is ing students’ accounts. 94 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Students need to be paid around $50 to deacti- exactly what one would expect for a social media vate Instagram or TikTok for four weeks, if they ex- trap: fear of missing out. pect to do it alone (figure S3.2.2). At the same time, Such fear can be grounded in reality: nonusers miss 46 percent of active Instagram users and 60 per- out on the social interactions happening on social cent of active TikTok users are willing to pay to media and on the offline discussions based on those have their own and others’ accounts deactivated for interactions. As one respondent who continues to use four weeks.5 the platform even though they would prefer to live in Why does this happen? When participants were a world where it didn’t exist wrote, “I feel like if I stop asked, the dominant reason they mentioned is using it, I will be completely out of the loop.” It may Figure S3.2.2 Consumer surplus across welfare measures Average welfare: TikT ok A verage welfare: Instagram Willingness to accept ($) Willingness to accept ($) p < 0.01 p < 0.01 80 p < 0.01 80 p < 0.01 60 µ = 55 60 µ = 47 µ = 39 µ = 37 40 40 20 20 0 0 –20 –20 µ = –6 µ = –9 –40 µ = –24 –40 µ = –43 –60 –60 –80 –80 Fraction negative: TikT ok F raction negative: Instagram Deriving negative welfare (%) Deriving negative welfare (%) 100 100 80 80 p < 0.01 71 60 p < 0.01 60 60 46 47 p < 0.01 p < 0.01 40 40 28 31 20 20 14 8 0 0 V aluation keeping network Valuation removing network Product market valuation Product market valuation (with non-users) Note: Error bars represent 95 percent confidence intervals. Source: Bursztyn and others 2023. CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 95 be costly to use the platform, but it is even costlier to What are the policy implications? Many social be the only one not using it. media users seem to prefer to live in a world without Recent academic work points to self- control issues social media but are willing to quit it only if others and addiction being major factors in young people’s also do. This characterizes a coordination problem. social media use.6 The above findings on a collective One potential policy avenue is regulation and bans — trap indicate that, even in the absence of self- control actions policymakers are discussing and implement- problems or addiction, many users are joining and ing. Another avenue is to provide coordination tools staying on social media platforms despite not enjoy- that allow users to cut down their social media use ing them. This conclusion challenges the argument together. These could be designed and developed that because people spend a lot of time on social through public- private partnerships or using incen- media, it must be creating value for them. tives or subsidies. NOTES 1. Allcott and others 2020; Allcott, Gentzkow and Song 2022; Braghieri, 4. This is the idea behind Bursztyn and others (2023). Levy and Makarin 2022. 5. Identical experiments run by the authors on the deactivation of navigation 2. See, for instance, Richtel, Pearson and Levenson (2023). apps rule out that the effects are mechanically driven by aspects of the elicitation procedure and help rule out that the findings simply reflect a 3. For popular press coverage on this matter, see, for instance, Ritchie general distaste for big tech or digital products. (2024). 6. Allcott, Gentzkow and Song 2022. 96 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 SPOTLIGHT 3.3 Worker agency in the digital age Carina Prunkl, Utrecht University and University of Oxford; Joel Anderson, Utrecht University; Uğur Aytaç, Utrecht University; Jeroen Hopster, Utrecht University; Juri Viehoff, Utrecht University Digital technologies are transforming the workplace. First, control requires understanding (see also the This spotlight is concerned with the effects of digital subsection below on epistemic agency and under- technologies on worker agency, which broadly refers standing). By limiting employees’ insight into the to workers’ effective ability to make choices that align technologies with which they work, many work en- with their beliefs and values, to draw meaning from vironments make it difficult for workers to assess the their work and to exercise adequate control over their adequacy of digital solutions or outputs, something work and work environment.1 that could be exacerbated by the greater diffusion of The relationships among digitalization, agency and artificial intelligence (AI). Consider the proverbial the workplace are dynamic, with each element shap- “keeping humans on the loop,” expected to ensure ing and being shaped by the others. Digitalization that automated systems do not run unchecked.5 With- transforms workplace structures and processes, which out sufficient access to information, workers may be has effects on the agency that workers can exercise. In unable to confidently make well- informed decisions — turn, agents shape how digital technologies are imple- reducing their oversight to little more than a formality. mented, resisted or adapted in workplace settings.2 Second, workers’ control over their work can be The ability to exercise agency at the workplace is limited by rigid structures imposed by digital solu- broken down in four key elements: C- A-R- E.3 Autono- tions, reducing their ability to adjust system settings, mous agency requires a substantial degree of effective correct inaccuracies, override automated decisions or control (C) of the circumstances in which one works. It address issues linked to the use of the digital systems. requires meaningful input into the co- creative author- For example, staff at a child welfare agency in Wis- ship (A) of the work one carries out. The work process consin reported frustration at losing decisionmaking also needs to be socially embedded in valuable rela- power to an algorithm for foster care allocation and tionships (R) connecting one exercising agency to oth- criticized its shortcomings, such as a lack of under- ers. Lastly, one’s participation in the work process must standing of childhood trauma.6 be informed by an understanding of it that ensures a Third, even when control is possible in theory, it degree of epistemic agency (E). The four elements of can be undermined in practice by narrow toleranc- CARE are interrelated and inform one another. es in fast- paced processes, by repetitive or complex tasks that can foster automation bias, the tendency to uncritically accept algorithmic outputs. In such cases C — control and discretionary authority decisions often default to automated outcomes. For example, in healthcare settings automation bias has Agency in the workplace relies on having a certain been associated with cognitively demanding diag- amount of discretion about how to carry out tasks nostic tasks.7 — free from meddlesome or punitive surveillance and (technological or human) micromanaging — something that is widely valued across cultures and A — authorship and ownership work environments.4 Although digital technologies offer numerous opportunities for workers to person- Authorship and ownership of one’s profession- alize their tools, the nature and complexity of digital al activities are key for workers to derive meaning, tools and the fast pace of automated processes pose a purpose and a sense of accomplishment in the work- threat to this discretion in three ways. place.8 Authorship ensures that work outcomes align CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 97 with one’s values and intentions, whereas ownership and our environment and in how we uncover and ad- involves a sense of responsibility for one’s work and dress injustices.17 is a prerequisite for feeling recognized and esteemed for one’s contributions.9 Digital technologies can al- leviate several tedious tasks, such as bookkeeping E — epistemic agency and understanding or repetitive communication, freeing time for more meaningful or interesting work, but these potential Epistemic agency and understanding support many benefits are rarely reaped evenly across occupational of the other elements of worker agency insofar as categories or sectors. they are necessary for seeing one’s workplace tasks as For example, gaps in work autonomy may widen justified and, relatedly, for being motivated to carry between white collar workers and shop floor or as- them out. Insight into the work process and the con- sembly line workers.10 AI technologies, if applied in text of work also provide intrinsic value to the worker the same way as classical programming, risk extend- and productive activity. Digital solutions, especially ing this to additional categories of professional and ones using machine learning techniques, can hamper white- collar jobs. When pace, timing and order are understanding because they lack transparency in a determined by technology (see also the subsection variety of ways. The system’s workings and capabili- above on control and discretionary authority), there ties are not disclosed to the employee — for instance, is little room for authorship, leaving employees feel- due to negligence or intellectual property restric- ing fungible. Increased surveillance practices — which tions. The employee does not have the technical skills can now encompass workers’ “thoughts, feelings necessary to comprehend how the system functions. and physiology, location and movement, task per- Or the system’s nonlinear and complex architecture formance, and professional profile and reputation”— inherently resists human introspection (lack of inter- further erode ownership.11 Such technologies coerce pretability).18 Epistemic agency also involves workers workers into becoming ever more efficient, signifi- having the opportunity to contribute with their own cantly undermining authorship.12 knowledge and expertise both to their own work pro- cesses and to their overall work environment. This in- cludes not only the capacity to question and correct R — relationships and community digital solutions where necessary but also the oppor- tunity to shape how such solutions are implemented Agency is intimately linked with being embedded in their broader work context. in social relationships.13 In the workplace, relation- The CARE approach to worker agency suggests two ships influence employee outcomes such as work recommendations. First, policymakers can work with attitudes, withdrawal and effectiveness.14 Digitaliza- the private sector to establish guidelines for algorithmic tion can disrupt traditional forms of communication decisionmaking — and digitalization more broadly — in and community, changing the feasibility and nature the workplace. Such guidelines at a minimum need to of coworker interactions.15 While remote work offers ensure that automated decisions are explainable and several advantages on the control dimension, it has contestable by employees, thereby securing control been shown to lead to increased feelings of loneliness and epistemic agency. Employer disclosure of the ex- and isolation.16 But even for onsite work, digital solu- tent of digital monitoring at the workplace would be tions can reduce formal and informal interactions at important. Guidelines on work surveillance should be the workplace due to isolating working conditions informed by notions of prerogative to contest automat- that require more screen time and fewer face- to- ed decisions and take seriously the principle of keep- face interactions, automated workflows that replace ing humans in the loop. Second, worker participation collaboration, asynchronous forms of communica- and an ability to unionize can support securing work- tion and more comprehensive surveillance systems. er agency. This could involve proactively facilitating These developments undermine worker agency, workers’ possibilities to organize and having firm gov- since sharing and comparing experiences with others ernance structures that allow worker representatives to play a fundamental role in how we perceive ourselves engage in participatory design and decisionmaking. 98 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Table S3.2.1 The CARE framework C — control and A — authorship and R — relationships and E — epistemic agency and Characteristic discretionary authority ownership community understanding Deficits → Lack of understanding → Overly controlled → Isolated working → Lack of information → High process speeds environments conditions → Lack of expertise → Rigid structures → Fungibility → Automated workflows → Lack of interpretability → Impossible to correct → No professional → Asynchronous → Inability to overwrite outputs system development communication → No point of contact → Lack of work autonomy → Surveillance → Surveillance → Lack of social embeddedness Enablers → Discretionary authority → Task customization → Social interactions → Transparency of digital systems → Understanding → Feedback mechanisms → Collaboration → Technical literacy → System support → Opportunities for → Community → Contributing expertise → Customizability professional growth → Open communication → Participation in digital solutions → System flexibility → Accountability channels frameworks → Privacy safeguards → Reduced micro- management Assessments → How much discretion → Do employees feel their → Do digital solutions → Are employees provided do employees have to work reflects their values replace opportunities with sufficient information decide how and when and professional goals? for formal and informal and training to understand tasks are performed? → Do tasks align with exchange? how digital tools and systems → Do employees have employees’ skills and → To what extent do function? sufficient information to expertise? Is there room automated workflows → Are decisionmaking processes make informed choices? for skill development? replace collaborative transparent and accessible to → Is there a risk that → Are there systems of processes? workers? employees passively accountability that respect → How do digital solutions → Are employees encouraged accept digital outputs employees’ expertise, impact employees’ sense and given the opportunity to without question? or do they create fear of of belonging and self- contribute their knowledge → Do employees have overstepping? perception at work? and expertise to their work access to adequate → Can employees → Does digitalization limit processes? support when addressing challenge and question employees’ ability to → Do employees have a voice errors or issues related to the outputs of automated share experiences that in how digital solutions are digital systems? systems without negative help uncover and address implemented and integrated into repercussions? workplace injustices? their broader work environment? Source: Authors’ elaboration. NOTES 1. Eteläpelto and others 2013. 10. Eurofound 2025. 2. Eurofund 2025; Pärli 2022; Unruh and others 2022. 11. Ball 2021, p. 23. 3. Anderson 2013; Mackenzie 2014; Mackenzie and Stoljar 2000. 12. Bogle 2024; Marsh, Vallejos and Spence 2022. 4. Gagné and Bhave 2010. 13. Landes and Settersten 2019; Mackenzie and Stoljar 2000. 5. Leins and Kaspersen 2021. 14. Chiaburu and Harrison 2008; Pereira and others 2023. 6. Saxena and Guha 2024. 15. Honneth 2024; Lane and others 2024. 7. Lyell and Coiera 2017. 16. Gallup 2024. 8. Aslan and Atesoglu 2021. 17. Honneth 2024; Hopster 2024; Milano and Prunkl 2025. 9. Anderson 2013. 18. Milano and Prunkl 2025; Selbst and Barocas 2018. CHAPTER 3 — ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE ACROSS LIFE STAGES: INSIGHTS FROM A PEOPLE- CENTRED PERSPECTIVE 99 CHAPTER 4 Framing narratives to reimagine artificial intelligence to advance human development 101 CHAPTER 4 Framing narratives to reimagine artificial intelligence to advance human development As the impact of artificial intelligence (AI) on human development remains uncertain, narratives can play a crucial role in shaping our choices. Rather than a techno-determinist narrative that assumes that AI alone will either solve all our problems or threaten the future of humanity, AI’s direction and deployment will be contingent on individual and collective choices. Institutional and social choices can enable AI to expand people’s capabilities and agency, as illustrated through AI’s applications for people with disabilities, care systems and gender equality, as well as in conceptualizing and mitigating AI bias. To do so, existing benchmarks to evaluate AI’s progress and safety should be complemented with ones that assess the impact on advancing human development. 102 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 “ For AI to be a boon, we must reorient; voices and perspectives and extend beyond the agen- pushing AI capabilities alone is not enough.” da of powerful players because in looking at their —Bengio and others 2024, p. 2 interests, we may lose sight of broader social implica- tions. The main argument of this chapter is that the Contrary to current narratives that assume a linear narratives about AI, and the processes around them, link from new technologies to social change, artificial should focus not just on what AI can do but also on intelligence’s (AI) impact on people is rooted in so- how it can enhance people’s capabilities. Framing cial structures and contingent on people’s choices. AI narratives this way can support power realignment and people are immersed in a reciprocal relationship (chapter 5) and harness the opportunities for AI to ad- shaped by social, economic and political process- vance human development (chapter 6). es. This two- way relationship, established time and again in past episodes of technological change, de- Beyond techno- determinism: mands attention in order to navigate fast-p aced AI in- Technological change shapes novations in ways that advance human development. and is shaped by society Narratives about technology — both in popular media and in the policy arena — often portray AI “ Because technology is highly malleable, as something that can, on its own, catalyse social there is no scarcity of compelling stories that change. They disproportionately focus on availability can support alternative paths for technology. and affordances of new technologies as ends in them- There are always many technological choices, selves, as illustrated by the way the media, investors with very different consequences, and if we and firms report the achievements of AI models on get stuck with a single idea or a narrow vision, a range of benchmarks.1 Yet social change is an out- it is very often not because we are short of come of complex interactions of technologies with options. Rather, it is because those setting the institutions, including social norms. And progress agenda and commanding social power have is neither inevitable nor neutral2 — it depends on our imposed it on us. Correcting this situation is choices: whether we ensure that the benefits of tech- partly about changing the narrative: dissecting nological advancement are broadly distributed and the driving vision, revealing the costs of the expand people’s freedoms and choices to lead lives current path, and giving airtime and attention they value and have reason to value. to alternative futures of technology.” AI affordances do matter. But considering these —Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023, p. 97 societal drivers can help with the design, develop- ment and use of AI that expands people’s agency and Narratives about AI often oversimplify technology’s avoids creating or reproducing inequalities. impact on social change by assuming that technolo- The nature of AI, its implications for society, and its gy alone can shape social outcomes — called techno- future development and deployment remain uncer- determinism. For instance, when digital technology tain. This makes landing on a set of choices to harness is applied to alleviate certain social problems, there AI’s potential much more complicated. So this uncer- has long been a tendency to assume that, by its mere tainty makes narratives much more determinant in implementation, it will generate the desired results.3 shaping our choices, given that there is little else guid- AI has been portrayed as a revolutionary technology, ing us about what the future will hold (spotlight 4.1). with the potential to solve complex problems, unlock Framing narratives about how AI can advance human economic growth and contribute to human flourish- development is crucial at a time of momentous chang- ing.4 But the history of science, technology and inno- es in policies, institutions and regulations. A narrative vation points to a more nuanced reality — technology centred on advancing human development can in- always coevolves with economic, social and political form crucial decisions that will have implications in systems5 and is codetermined with the evolution of the years, perhaps decades, to come. norms, institutions and public policies.6 For exam- Along with the content of the narrative, the process ple, economic expansion during the Industrial Revo- matters as well. Debates about AI must reflect diverse lution was the product of new technology along with CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 103 new ways of organizing economic production, new quality of healthcare by, among other things, reduc- workforce skills and a range of new institutions that ing administrative burdens on providers (chapter 6). emerged in response to new demands.7 Even so, AI cannot provide quick fixes — its deploy- A deterministic view of technology drives a di- ment alone does not determine social outcomes. chotomy between utopian and dystopian futures for Such promises of quick fixes often appeal to under- humanity with the rise of AI, often fuelled by media funded institutions.15 A technology may accomplish representations of AI with a great deal of hype and a narrowly defined goal, but doing so in a way that exaggeration.8 Two dichotomous perspectives — one solves problems for all rather than for just a subset optimistic, where technology is considered a positive of individuals who can afford to benefit matters. Ul- force for progress, and another pessimistic, where timately, how technological solutions determine so- technology is inexorably outside human control — cial outcomes is shaped by social and institutional have one thing in common: they oversimplify the arrangements. complex interactions between technology and soci- ety and project a sense of inevitability for the social “ The impacts of AI stem not from individual consequences that follow technological change.9 technical components but from the dynamic They seemingly leave little room for human agency ways they interact with social forces and from to shape technological change in ways that enhance how they are used, by whom and for what people’s freedoms, opportunities and choices.10 In purpose. Human agency and context matter contrast with this view, this chapter argues that the outcomes of technological change are not inevitable; But deploying technology as solutions is not the they are contingent on social choices.11 only thing that matters; the way in which technol- Moreover, technologies are never neutral. They ogy development occurs also involves choices that embody social contexts, choices and values.12 The could lead to differing outcomes across social groups. characteristics of AI deserve attention in their own Technological change can reinforce, amplify and re- right. But the impacts cannot be analysed in isolation configure inequalities, potentially exacerbating dis- from the contexts in which AI is deployed. The inter- crimination or generating new forms of it. Seemingly actions between technology and society are interde- innocuous design features can mask social choices, pendent and multifaceted, and they both change in with profound consequences.16 For instance, gender relation to each other.13 The impacts of AI stem not inequalities in technology production and consump- from individual technical components but from the tion are reflected in the development and use of AI.17 dynamic ways they interact with social forces and AI has the potential to ameliorate social inequalities, from how they are used, by whom and for what pur- but achieving this potential — and empowering people pose.14 Human agency and context matter. and communities — requires considering social con- With the rapid rise in AI’s development and avail- texts so that policy and institutional choices on the ability, techno- deterministic narratives assume that trajectory of AI and its deployment advance human technological solutions will mitigate complex social development.18 challenges in such areas as education, healthcare Framing a narrative on AI that considers this and social services. To be clear, nothing is inherent- broader codetermination of technology and society ly wrong with intending to deploy new technologies can support the design and use of AI in ways that ad- to address societal challenges, as argued in much of vance human development. Through the examples of this Report. History is replete with examples of tech- people with disabilities, the care system, women and nological changes that revolutionized human lives, AI bias, this chapter illustrates how narratives matter bringing massive improvements in living standards, and how their framing can help in reimagining choic- connections and economic growth. Indeed, AI can es about technologies, policies and institutions to be massively helpful. For example, generative AI in expand people’s capabilities and agency. Narratives education can help close persistent gaps by paving not only affect the kind of technologies we decide to the way for truly adaptive, on- demand and personal- develop or use — they also shape how we define prob- ized teaching. It also has the potential to enhance the lems in need of technological solutions. 104 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 “ Through the examples of people with Over the years digital technologies have brought disabilities, the care system, women and AI about considerable advancement in assistive tech- bias, this chapter illustrates how narratives nologies, offering new opportunities to enhance matter and how their framing can help in independence, participation and access.22 For ex- reimagining choices about technologies, ample, mobile phones function as a cost- effective policies and institutions to expand people’s assistive technology.23 Because of their versatility, capabilities and agency. Narratives not only they can include multiple accessibility features — affect the kind of technologies we decide to such as the ability to access information in different develop or use — they also shape how we define formats — into a single device. This is emblematic problems in need of technological solutions of a broader shift where inclusive features are inte- grated into mainstream consumer technologies, re- ducing the need for specialized products for specific AI’s potential for people with disabilities: needs.24 Framing a more nuanced narrative The recent advent and massive adoption of AI have to expand human development enabled pathbreaking innovations in assistive and ac- cessible technologies.25 Live captioning algorithms People with disabilities provide a compelling illustra- help deaf or hard of hearing individuals. Image rec- tion of the substantial opportunities and challenges ognition solutions allow blind and visually impaired that AI presents. Technological innovations can play people to hear descriptions of the world around them. a major role in facilitating choices and open opportu- And text- to-speech and speech-t o-text solutions sup- nities for people with disabilities. But AI’s potential port people with dysarthric speech and people who to revolutionize the lives of people with disabilities have difficulty typing.26 These technologies’ potential would have to go beyond framings of technologies as to enhance the capabilities of people with disabilities enablers to overcome impairments. Indeed, relying can be immense, improving the quality, availability on various technologies for fundamental life func- and affordability of accessible technologies. Main- tions exposes people with disabilities to dispropor- stream AI- based technologies such as smart home tionate social marginalization when the technology devices can allow people to control their environment is inaccessible, inappropriate, inconsiderate of their through voice. needs and preferences or incongruous with their Generative AI has emerged as a useful tool for identities. While AI tools create enormous possibili- people with disabilities, particularly for accessibility ties for people with disabilities, they are insufficient — producing descriptions of images for blind and to promote inclusion and participation on their own. visually impaired people27 and converting text into Inclusion is a fundamentally social process that en- easy- to-read formats for people with developmen- tails broader changes in social norms, institutions tal and intellectual disabilities.28 More recently, and policies. large language models have been explored as a way For people with disabilities, human–machine in- to support communication for users of alternative teractions and machine- mediated human–human and augmentative communication29 and to trans- interactions are hardly new.19 People with disabilities late sign language into voice or text.30 As these tools have long relied on various kinds of technologies for are rapidly integrated into education, healthcare, everyday functions, such as communication, mobil- workplaces and public services, the opportunities ity, writing and reading. In fact, many technological to promote greater accessibility and inclusion are developments — such as email, text messaging, op- enormous. tical character recognition, text to speech, speech to text and smart home systems — were originally de- signed for people with disabilities before being more Multifaceted inequalities get in the way widely adopted.20 These technologies generally fall under the umbrella of assistive technologies.21 As the history of past innovations in assistive and ac- cessible technologies demonstrates, the features and CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 105 affordances of new technologies need to be consid- people with disabilities depend are manufactured in ered in the light of the diversity and heterogeneity a handful of countries. Most of the patents for both inherent to the experience of disability. When access conventional and emerging (AI, robotics and virtual to even the most basic and essential assistive technol- reality) assistive technologies are filed in China, the ogies is uneven, the opportunities brought about by United States, Japan, the Republic of Korea or Euro- advances in digital technologies remain unrealized pean countries — all of which have high or very high for many and may further exacerbate inequalities.31 HDI values (figures 4.2 and 4.3). More than 2.5 billion people need access to assistive Technologies developed in higher HDI coun- technologies.32 But access remains highly unequal tries often fail to consider the diverse realities and around the world.33 Similar inequalities can be ob- infrastructural and cultural contexts for people with served in the case of information and communication disabilities in much of the world. In contexts with technologies (figure 4.1).34 People with disabilities high poverty and minimal progress in enforcing ac- also have lower digital skills because accessible dig- cessibility, the relevance of apps and other tech- ital literacy training remains limited.35 nologies that rely on maximum internet speed and Even when people have access to assistive tech- smartphones with high- performance processers may nologies, the technologies may not work the same be limited.36 These persistent inequalities stifle AI’s way everywhere. Most of the technologies on which potential. Figure 4.1 People with disabilities also face inequalities in internet use AVERAGE: 39 AVERAGE: 28 Persons with disabilities Persons without disabilities 106 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Internet users (%) 100 50 0 )GW( *dahC )GW( *cilbupeR nacirfA lartneC ) GW( *ognoC eht fo .peR .meD )GW( *racsagadaM )GW( *enoeL arreiS )GW( *iwalaM )GW( *adnagU )GW( *aibmaZ )GW( *adnawR )GW( *natsikaP )GW( *airegiN ) GW( uassiB-aeniuG *aibmoloC )SDM( *natsinahgfA )GW( *ogoT )GW( *ilaM )GW( *anahG ) GW( etseL-romiT )GW( *ewbabmiZ )GW( *itiaH )GW( *abuC *alametauG )GW( ainatiruaM )GW( *itabiriK )SDM( *senippilihP )GW( *lapeN )GW( *ohtoseL )GW( *epicnirP dna emoT oaS )GW( *acirfA htuoS *ocixeM )GW( *aibmaG )GW( *aisinuT )GW( *lageneS )GW( *aomaS *ureP )GW( *ailognoM )GW( ulavuT )GW( agnoT *ainablA )GW( *emaniruS )SDM( *aciR atsoC )SDM( *aigroeG *sevidlaM )SDM( *aidnI )SDM( natsikijaT )SDM( RDP oaL * The difference between people with disabilities and people without disabilities is significant at 5 percent. Note: MDS indicates data produced with the Model Disability Survey. WG indicates data produced with the Washington Group Short Set of Questions. Data are for 2021 or the most recent year available. Source: UNDESA 2024d. Figure 4.2 Most patents for conventional assistive technology are filed in just a handful of countries… Number of patents, 2000–2010 50,000 40,000 30,000 20,000 10,000 0 Even for people who speak English, the automatic Agency at the centre, not an afterthought speech recognition model is trained on American Eng- lish and thus fails to recognize local expressions and Consider Google Relate, a free mobile app that can vocabulary in other languages and cultures.40 Google create personalized speech recognition models in Relate supports communication by helping strangers English for nonstandard speech to support commu- or unfamiliar partners better understand the speech nication. It has the potential to greatly enhance the of people with communication disabilities. Integra- social inclusion of people with communication dis- tion of these technologies is contingent on changes in abilities.37 But a prerequisite for accessing the app is communication norms — through, for instance, greater a smartphone that meets minimum specifications.38 acceptance of diverse ways of communicating.41 This Users also need reliable internet connectivity. In- is true particularly for people with communication deed, people who struggle to communicate in Eng- disabilities who have been subjected to marginaliza- lish have found it difficult to use Google Relate in tion and stigma throughout their lives.42 Technologies daily life.39 like these can reshape communication dynamics. But CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 107 natsikijaT ainemrA natszygryK aigroeG licnuoC noitarepooC fluG aikavolS avodloM natsikebzU suraleB gruobmexuL natshkazaK dnalerI lagutroP dnaliahT anitnegrA yragnuH ainamoR aihcezC noitazinagrO tnetaP naisaruE dnalniF muigleB aisyalaM eyikrüT kramneD senippilihP dnalreztiwS aisenodnI maN teiV airtsuA dnaloP yawroN learsI acirfA htuoS nedewS dnalaeZ weN ylatI sdnalrehteN eropagniS )RAS( anihC ,gnoK gnoH ocixeM noitaredeF naissuR lizarB niapS aidnI modgniK detinU ecnarF adanaC ailartsuA ynamreG aeroK fo cilbupeR ecffiO tnetaP naeporuE noitazinagrO ytreporP lautcelletnI dlroW napaJ setatS detinU anihC Source: Human Development Report Office based on data from WIPO (2021). Figure 4.3 …as are most patents for emerging assistive technology Number of patents, 2000–2010 7,000 6,000 5,000 4,000 3,000 2,000 1,000 0 changes in communication norms, adequate aware- Yet this freedom is compromised when some ways ness and training, and contextual relevance are neces- of being and doing are judged as inferior to others. sary for a transformative impact on people’s lives. Exoskeletons are wearable robotic devices designed Rather than assuming a deficit that needs to be to restore human movement, particularly for people fixed, the design of AI technologies needs to recog- with mobility- related disabilities. This technology nize the ways in which people with disabilities navi- has been hailed for its potential to enable people who gate the world and then innovate with the objective of cannot walk to do so again. But it could also reify dis- enhancing these capabilities. That is, AI applications criminatory and ableist norms that privilege walking should focus on making things easier, drawing on the as the only valid form of locomotion and marginalize experience and expertise of people with disabilities, wheelchair users.45 Likewise, technologies for autistic rather than assuming a deficit that needs to be fixed.43 children are guided by a deficit perspective and aim Agency — people’s freedom and ability to make and to correct, fix and cure rather than focusing on chil- act on choices that they value and have reason to dren’s unique needs and strengths.46 Many technol- value — is a critical aspect of human development.44 ogies for autism concentrate on controlling autistic 108 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 aigroeG gruobmexuL licnuoC noitarepooC fluG natszygryK avodloM aikavolS dnaliahT suraleB kramneD lagutroP aihcezC dnalniF aisyalaM noitazinagrO tnetaP naisaruE anitnegrA ainamoR muigleB yragnuH dnalreztiwS eyikrüT yawroN maN teiV nedewS dnalaeZ weN dnaloP airtsuA aisenodnI ylatI senippilihP sdnalrehteN acirfA htuoS modgniK detinU learsI eropagniS ecnarF ocixeM )RAS( anihC ,gnoK gnoH niapS lizarB aidnI noitaredeF naissuR ynamreG adanaC ailartsuA aeroK fo cilbupeR napaJ ecffiO tnetaP naeporuE noitazinagrO ytreporP lautcelletnI dlroW setatS detinU anihC Source: Human Development Report Office based on data from WIPO (2021). people by encouraging socially normative behaviour “ Rather than considering disability a problem to without accounting for the adverse effect of doing be fixed or an afterthought, we should recognize so.47 The values embodied in such technologies may people with disabilities as active participants be contrary to those of their users or their sense of in technology design and development identity.48 Such stereotypical conceptions of disabili- ty, when encoded in technology design, could reduce People with disabilities have too often been por- the agency and choice that people with disabilities trayed as passive beneficiaries of technologies,59 have over their lives. neglecting their expertise, knowledge and diverse Also crucial is recognizing the risks involved and ex- experiences, which have informed many of the major ercising caution while using AI- based technologies, breakthroughs in technology and communication particularly in high-s takes situations. AI tools contin- — including text- to-speech, speech recognition and ue to suffer from hallucinations, bias and underrep- optical character recognition, which have benefited resentation of people with disabilities in training data.49 everyone.60 Rather than considering disability a prob- These limitations pose particular constraints for peo- lem to be fixed or an afterthought, we should recog- ple with disabilities. For example, blind users who rely nize people with disabilities as active participants in on generative AI tools to access image- based informa- technology design and development.61 Since they tion cannot independently verify the accuracy of the have the most to gain from AI — and the most to lose outputs.50 Likewise, due to the underrepresentation — designs centred on the participation of people with of people with disabilities in the datasets used to train disabilities have paved the way for human–machine AI models, those models are not very effective at gen- interactions that overcome homogenization and truly erating accessible content,51 can generate misinforma- embrace human diversity. tion about accessibility and disability52 and reinforce stereotypes.53 Indeed, most of the internet remains in- Narratives about care technologies accessible for people with disabilities. Despite substan- overlook the profoundly human tial progress in defining and adoption of standards for and relational nature of care digital accessibility around the world, about 95.9 per- cent of the top million websites do not comply with the Advanced digital technologies — including AI, ro- International Web Content Accessibility Guidelines.54 botics and the Internet- of-Things — have been in- It is thus important to ensure that AI technologies and troduced in the care sector to reduce the burden on interfaces are accessible so that AI- generated content caregivers and boost independence among care re- does not heighten inaccessibility. Establishing human- cipients.62 The growing share of older people in the in-the-l oop mechanisms is critical when AI tools are population and the concomitant shortage of care used for accessibility — to ensure that people with dis- workers have motivated investment in care technol- abilities have access to accurate information, quality ogies in many countries. For instance, the European services and meaningful experiences, as well as human Union invested $103 million in a research and devel- alternatives when needed. opment program called Robotics for Ageing Well in In many cases people with disabilities have to com- 2015–2020, and in 2019 the UK government invested promise their privacy to access essential services.55 $48 million in robots for adult social care.63 Some nar- They face an unfair tradeoff between accessibili- ratives backing these policy developments posit that ty and privacy while using AI tools for their specific innovations in digital and AI technologies can solve needs. People with disabilities constitute a highly het- the worker shortages and reduce public spending on erogenous group — with very distinct needs. Exist- care.64 Public narratives on care robots often reflect ing privacy protections hence become insufficient as this techno- deterministic view, too often focusing on their unique needs increase their risk of being reiden- the potential of these technologies to care for older tified.56 And their reliance on AI tools for fundamen- people.65 But those narratives misconstrue the na- tal aspects of their lives means that privacy violations ture of care as a human, social and emotional activity can have huge consequences,57 exposing them to and fail to account for the impact of care technolo- greater risk of discrimination and surveillance.58 gies on human interaction and caring relationships.66 CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 109 In reality, the need for care is increasing, while those chat and other audio-v isual tools allow older people to who provide care are unpaid or underpaid. connect with distant others and maintain social, emo- The use of technologies for care is not new. Wash- tional and cultural bonds. For caregivers digital and ing machines, vacuum cleaners and the like entered telecare technologies can ensure the safety and secu- homes long ago and have helped ease domestic rity of those under their care. A wide array of devices work.67 Recent applications of digital and AI technol- measure life functions, register movements and assist ogies have the potential to further enhance the well- with everyday tasks. Such devices are often equipped being of caregivers and care recipients. But care is to automatically notify relatives or health profession- a relational activity. So, it is essential to understand als if the collected data show a deviating pattern.74 how these technologies reshape care practices and Having access to and evaluating one’s own health caring relationships. data can strengthen the agency of care recipients Digital technologies are being introduced as care is while interacting with health professionals.75 But being commercialized.68 Wage care work is growing health trackers can also result in increased feelings of rapidly in many economies. And personalized and pri- stress and anxiety due to constant tracking of health vatized funding and organization have become an im- parameters.76 Then there are technologies to control portant mode of care provision. Care has been framed and regulate physical space and environment. For in- in many places as private responsibility of families, stance, smart home technologies can ensure a light bolstering a growing care economy around the world.69 path comes on when someone steps out of bed to re- The paid care economy supports more than 380 mil- duce the likelihood of falls or employ environmental lion jobs around the world.70 Rapid population ageing, sensors that adjust heating, ventilation and air con- along with reduced availability of unpaid familial care, ditioning systems. These technologies can enhance has bolstered this trend. Rising female employment, older people’s independence, especially since they do accompanied by insufficient progress in redistribut- not require specialized digital skills to operate.77 ing care work within households, has reduced the time Trust forms an essential condition for caring rela- women can devote to care-r elated tasks. tionships. As discussed in chapter 3, older people tend to use digital and AI technologies at much lower lev- “ Care — by its very nature — is emotional els than younger people. Care technologies, as well as and relational. Job replacement and policies around age care, need to be informed by an augmentation of caregiving tasks are thus understanding of older people’s preferences, beliefs, much more complicated and may give rise expectations and fears regarding AI. Older people to a new set of tensions and tradeoffs across HDI levels expect to have less choice and con- trol over their lives as AI technologies become further Digital technologies are often introduced with integrated into daily life (figure 4.4). Trust in AI tech- the objective of replacing, mediating or augment- nologies is lowest among older people. Only 48 percent ing caregivers’ work.71 Technologies that mediate of older people — as opposed to 68 percent of younger interactions between caregivers and care recipients people — express confidence that AI technologies are are fundamentally reshaping how care is communi- currently designed to act in the best interest of society.78 cated and monitored.72 Care— b y its very nature— i s This expected loss of agency could be driven by a emotional and relational. Job replacement and aug- variety of factors. Replacing in- person contact with mentation of caregiving tasks are thus much more remote monitoring and supervision can add to older complicated and may give rise to a new set of ten- people’s social isolation.79 A recent survey in the Unit- sions and tradeoffs.73 ed Kingdom finds that people note considerable ad- vantages of robotic care assistants, particularly in relation to efficiency.80 However, worries about the New possibilities, but also tensions loss of human interaction were also widely prevalent. Indeed, 78 percent of people were concerned that care Digital and AI- enabled technologies allow people to recipients would lose out on interaction with human care for others from a distance. Smartphones, video caregivers. This finding indicates people’s openness 110 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure 4.4 Older people expect to have less choice and control over their lives as artificial intelligence technologies become more integrated into daily life Change (%) 10 5 0 15–24 25–34 35–44 45–59 60 and older High HDI –5 Low and medium HDI –10 –15 Very high HDI –20 Age group HDI is Human Development Index. Note: Data are a pooled sample of 21 countries. Source: Human Development Report Office based on the United Nations Development Programme Survey on AI. to using AI to support the care process without under- Design choices and processes can play a crucial mining the social, emotional and ethical dimensions role in either fostering or inhibiting trust. Ageist ste- of care. Some 48 percent of people agreed that as- reotypes85 of older people being frail, lonely and in signing responsibility would be difficult if things went need of physical, cognitive and mental maintenance wrong. There is a momentous risk of manipulation are embedded in these technologies and in the nar- and deception, disrespecting the agency and digni- ratives hailing their potential.86 Like other AI biases, ty of older people, particularly when they may not be ageism can appear through the beliefs and ideologies fully aware of the capabilities of the technologies and of those creating AI technologies or be embedded in are unable to provide informed consent.81 the datasets that AI systems process.87 For instance, Also consider the unfair tradeoffs that such technolo- AI technologies for older adults disproportionate- gies impose on older people — for instance, between pri- ly focus on healthcare and chronic disease man- vacy and the ability to live at home.82 Such tradeoffs can agement, overlooking other crucial aspects such as undermine older people’s agency by constraining their leisure and enjoyment.88 ability to make choices in line with their values and Technology design and deployment often exclude preferences. This is particularly concerning because older people and impose limits on their participa- older people across countries value privacy more than tion,89 reflecting a patronizing attitude towards age- younger people do.83 People’s attitudes towards care ro- ing. Many AI applications for aged care, such as home bots could also be influenced by a lack of alternatives. monitoring or fall detection systems, involve surveil- Indeed, support for care technologies during old age lance technologies. These devices collect data about depends on the generosity of local welfare provision. A users’ daily activities — often without their awareness survey in 28 European countries finds that people are or ability to override these technological decisions.90 not keen to introduce robots as part of old-a ge care, at While the intentions of the developers and deployers least when the human care available is generous.84 of these technologies is to promote the wellbeing of CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 111 older people, respecting their agency is paramount into short units of time promotes fragmented and to establish trust, enable meaningful choices and ex- task- oriented practices, pre- empting a more person- pand their freedoms.91 centred approach, with detrimental impacts for the In many cases the limitations of the technology wellbeing of both care recipients and work quality.100 itself can pose risks to people’s safety. It is essential Good care depends on caring relationships between that technologies — particularly care technologies caregivers and care recipients.101 However, this can — be evaluated in the context of use because people be difficult to achieve when caregivers face pressure depend on them for basic needs and life functions. to fulfil multiple competing demands at work. Research into these technologies’ impact on the care Research on the potential opportunities and chal- process and relationships remains scarce. These tech- lenges associated with care technologies is concen- nologies, when introduced without rigorous evalua- trated in Europe, North America and Japan. These tion of their capabilities, can expose older people to technologies have been deployed in institutional care risk of injury and negative health outcomes. For ex- settings and to a lesser extent in homes. Across many ample, robots designed to assist older people with low- and middle-income countries care is provided mobility could result in greater risk of falls.92 largely by women within familial and kin networks. Care technologies are often introduced to reduce the In these contexts advanced care technologies may be burden on human workers. Care robots can purported- inaccessible, unaffordable, inadequate and even cul- ly free up time for the social, relational and emotional turally inappropriate. Most of these specialized tech- elements of care by automating the physically strenu- nologies are expensive, and many are intended for use ous ones, such as lifting and transferring. But care work in care institutions. They are thus unsuitable for the in- is fundamentally different from other kinds because it formal, community- based and culturally heterogenous involves tasks that combine physical and affective el- nature of care provision across the world. Digital care ements that cannot usually be separated in ways that platforms that organize the supply and demand of paid allow for full job replacement.93 Indeed, care technolo- care work have proliferated across the world (spotlight gies create more work for care workers by reconfiguring 4.2). While these technologies offer greater flexibility, and reorganizing tasks. For instance, constant digital in the absence of regulations and policies to support monitoring can intensify the workload of care work- caregivers and care recipients, they can reinforce and ers, particularly unpaid family caregivers. 94 Especially even exacerbate the same inequalities, power imbal- when such technologies are deployed to monitor care ances, exploitation and informalization that have long workers, they tend to redefine care work based on the pervaded care systems around the world. amount of time consumed in performing care tasks.95 Nursing homes in many countries are experiment- ing with care robots. These technologies tend to in- Shaping a narrative that advances a caring future troduce new tasks for care workers — such as setting up, moving, operating, mediating, cleaning, updating Across the world paid care work remains characterized and overseeing these technologies.96 Care workers by a lack of rights, benefits and protections; low wages must also constantly monitor and observe the inter- or noncompensation; low unionization; physical and actions between older people and the technologies.97 mental health impacts; and in some cases sexual vio- In Japan these robots have been associated with in- lence and harassment.102 Care continues to be viewed creased employment of care workers.98 In fact, they as an extension of women’s traditional roles.103 The would likely increase employment of lower skilled shortage of care workers in many countries is an out- workers, who would not have to interact as much with come of political, economic and social choices. It often people and could get by with less care training and arises from the low status accorded to and inadequate experience. A higher share of care tasks performed remuneration for care work. These conditions would by robots is positively corelated with higher employ- likely worsen with technologies aimed solely at reduc- ment of care workers on temporary contracts.99 ing costs. As seen in the case of digital care platforms, The working conditions of care workers have im- technological fixes alone are likely to reproduce the plications for the quality of care. Reconfiguring care inequalities and exploitative conditions that produced 112 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 the care crisis in the first place (spotlight 4.2). These solutions should not distract from investment and conditions are unlikely to improve unless care tech- support for both paid and unpaid carers.110 In sum, nologies are developed and used to enhance the well- investments in AI need to be accompanied by invest- being and agency of both the people who provide care ments in people, as well as by supportive institutions and receive it, to promote trust, to strengthen caring and policies to ensure that AI augments what caregiv- relationships and to recognize and shift social norms. ers can do and the agency of those receiving care. Care- led approaches to developing and deploying AI “ Care technologies are developed and used require the active participation of the people being to enhance the wellbeing and agency of both cared for, as well as the people caring for them. the people who provide care and receive it, to promote trust, to strengthen caring relationships Narratives about gender digital and to recognize and shift social norms divides paint an incomplete picture We need a narrative to envision and create a more Technologies are neither inherently patriarchal nor caring future. Everyone needs care and support at unequivocally emancipatory.111 Digital technologies some stage of life, if not throughout it, to partici- and the internet have largely been considered dem- pate equally in society and to live with dignity. Care, ocratic and emancipatory tools with the potential to therefore, needs to be envisioned as critical to social empower women — and in many ways, they are. Mo- and economic wellbeing, not reduced to a commod- bile phones in particular have increased women’s ity, personal choice or family obligation.104 Com- access to information, opportunities, resources and plementary approaches such as paying care workers social networks and facilitated collective action.112 So, an amount that aligns with the social value of their the focus of digital inclusion policies has been on en- work, improving working conditions, supporting in- suring women’s equal access to digital technologies. formal caregivers and investing in comprehensive so- Despite multiple initiatives to expand access and cial support for older people are critical to tackle the affordability, inequalities in access to and use of dig- problems facing care systems. This narrative requires ital technologies have persisted. It is thus essential to recognizing and enhancing the agency of those who account for the ways gender inequalities manifest in provide and receive care and promoting public invest- women’s interactions with technologies.113 ment in care provision.105 Indeed, greater investment Technological change is shaped by and in turn in elder care is associated with having more human shapes gender norms. To illustrate this relationship carers available.106 Countries that spend a larger with an example, consider smart home technologies share of GDP on old- age support have more doctors — promoted as tools to reduce the drudgery associ- per resident and more long- term carers available.107 ated with domestic work. Digitally connected smart To reap the opportunities of AI for care, the focus devices such as cooking robots, robot vacuum clean- needs to be less about technology as a solution for ers, window cleaners and lawnmowers claim to trans- growing care needs and more about enhancing the form domestic work by freeing up women’s time from capabilities and agency of both caregivers and care unpaid domestic labour. A recent estimate found that recipients. These technologies are increasingly re- domestic automation could free up 9.3 percent of shaping care processes. For example, AI chatbots women’s time in Japan and 5.8 percent in the Unit- could alleviate administrative burdens on both pro- ed Kingdom to undertake full- or part- time employ- fessional and family caregivers. They could also ex- ment.114 Historically, household appliances have pand access to information — for example, suggesting helped women save time on domestic work and con- how to support an older person with a specific activity sequently enhance their participation in the labour or assisting with creating care plans.108 All generative force.115 But these technologies have not shifted gen- output and its adequacy must be critically appraised der roles that expect women to perform a majority before informing any care decisions or tasks — ideally of unpaid domestic work.116 Innovations in domestic with the consent and participation of the care recipi- technologies often reshaped household work by, for ents.109 At the same time investment in technological instance, increasing expectations around cleanliness CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 113 and home maintenance.117 In fact, such technologies Still, the underrepresentation of women and girls enable the disproportionate burden of household in STEM and their lower digital skills persist glob- work on women by continuing to frame domestic ally. Gender norms that construct mathematics as a work as primarily women’s responsibility.118 male discipline condition the aspirations, confidence Women’s marginalization from the technological and success of girls in STEM.121 Across 80 countries community has a profound impact on the design, boys are more likely to aspire to things- oriented or features and use of technologies.119 Notwithstanding STEM careers, whereas girls are more likely to as- the progress in recent decades, gender gaps in digi- pire to people- oriented careers.122 These norms are tal skills; opportunities for science, technology, en- widely prevalent across countries.123 Relatedly, social gineering and mathematics (STEM) education; and norms also portray men as more brilliant or inherent- the tech labour force have persisted.120 Underpinning ly talented than women.124 Norms that associate tal- these gaps are deeply entrenched power asymmetries ent with men are widely prevalent across contexts.125 and norms that condition women’s self- competence These norms are strongly associated with gender to engage with technology, the visibility and recog- gaps in competitiveness, self- confidence and will- nition they receive for their work and the extent to ingness to work in information and communication which technological innovations meet their needs. technology–related occupations.126 Girls perform equally well or better than boys when STEM subjects are not considered exclusively male Social norms condition women’s oriented.127 On average, 35 percent of STEM gradu- opportunities and choices ates are women — a share that has changed little over the past decade (figures 4.5 and 4.6). But women’s Remarkable progress has been made in expand- representation among STEM graduates is higher in ing access to education for girls around the world. some countries than in others. The reason? In many Figure 4.5 On average, only 35 percent of graduates in science, technology, engineering and mathematics are women Female (%) 70 60 50 40 Average 30 20 10 0 Sub-Saharan Europe and Central and Eastern and Latin America Northern Oceania Africa Northern Southern Southeastern and the Africa and America Asia Asia Caribbean Western Asia 114 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 regiN dahC anahG osaF anikruB ohtoseL idnuruB euqibmazoM nineB adnawR sellehcyeS ainatiruaM racsagadaM anawstoB suitiruaM aibimaN edreV obaC acirfA htuoS ainaznaT suraleB eniarkU ynamreG airtsuA avodloM gruobmexuL ecnarF adanaC orgenetnoM anivogezreH dna ainsoB natsinahgfA hsedalgnaB natsikebzU natshkazaK sevidlaM natsinemkruT aknaL irS natszygryK aidnI aeroK fo cilbupeR aidobmaC RDP oaL eropagniS ailognoM dnaliahT aisyalaM senippilihP aisenodnI ienurB ramnayM rodaucE .peR nacinimoD sociaC dna skruT sarudnoH adanerG ogaboT dna dadinirT abuC ezileB sdnalsI nigriV hsitirB learsI tpygE EAU nadroJ niarhaB aisinuT airyS ailartsuA sdnalsI llahsraM dnalaeZ weN ijiF aomaS Source: UNESCO 2024b. Figure 4.6 The share of graduates in science, technology, engineering and mathematics who are women has changed little since 2010–2011 Female (%) 60 55 50 45 40 35 30 25 20 15 10 cultures STEM is not considered appropriate only for about a third of global researchers in science are men.128 Nonetheless, in most countries, widely held women,130 only 12 percent of AI researchers are.131 gendered norms continue to restrict women’s partic- And women constitute only 30 percent of AI talent ipation in STEM. globally.132 While it remains important to enhance Social norms that assign a disproportionate share women’s participation in AI production, the terms of care responsibility constrain opportunities for of their inclusion matter equally. Masculine norms women to acquire digital skills (box 4.1). and value systems continue to govern participa- Sadly, these inequalities are now transposing onto tion in AI. Women working across the fields of data AI. In many cases, these inequalities widen when and AI have higher levels of formal education than focusing on AI rather than STEM broadly.129 While men but are overrepresented in lower status, lower CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 115 elihC aciR atsoC lizarB rodavlaS lE ocixeM aibmoloC amanaP anitnegrA yaugurU dnalreztiwS sdnalrehteN muigleB dnalerI dnalniF modgniK detinU niapS yawroN atlaM nedewS kramneD lagutroP eceerG ylatI dnalecI ainevolS ainauhtiL aihcezC yragnuH aivtaL aikavolS aitaorC dnaloP ainodecaM htroN airagluB ainamoR aibreS ainotsE ainablA narI fo cilbupeR cimalsI eyikrüT aibarA iduaS ainemrA occoroM surpyC aigroeG najiabrezA enitselaP rataQ aireglA namO Latin America Western Europe Central and Northern Africa Eastern Europe and Western Asia 2010 2020 Source: UNESCO 2024b. Box 4.1 Going beyond access: Women’s disproportionate care responsibilities drive their lower digital skills Women’s ability to acquire digital skills is shaped by deep-r ooted gender norms that assign them a disproportionate share of domestic and caregiving responsibilities.1 These norms limit their time and opportunities for education, skill development and workforce participation, reinforcing gender gaps in information and communication technology (ICT) skills.2 A clear relationship can be observed between caregiving responsibilities and digital skill acquisition, particularly among women, across Human Development Index values. As the number of children in the household increases, women’s ICT skills decline significantly (left panel of box figure 1). Notably, women with no children tend to have stronger ICT skills than men with no children (right panel of box figure 1). Because care responsibilities are unequally distributed, the gap appears with the first child and widens with two or three children. These findings illustrate how societal expectations around caregiving create additional barriers to women’s participation in the digital sphere. Thus, while expanding access to digital devices and skills training programs is essential, these efforts alone cannot overcome the structural inequalities imposed by social norms. Policies that recognize, account for and act on the unequal distribution of care responsibilities are crucial to ensure that women have the time, resources and support needed to acquire the requisite skills to thrive in the digital economy. Box figure 1 As the number of children in the household increases, women’s information and communication technology skills decline and the gender gap in skills widens Mean ICT Skills Index for women Gap in ICT Skills Index between men and women 0 .029 0.030 0.144 0.025 0.140 0.025 0.019 0.120 0.020 0.015 0.100 0.082 0.010 0.080 0.072 0.006 0.005 0.060 0.051 0.000 0.040 0.028 –0.005 0.020 –0.010 0.000 –0.015 –0.016 0 1 2 3 4 0 1 2 3 4 Number of children Number of children Note: The smaller sample size for men might limit the robustness of the gender gap data. Source: Human Development Report Office based on data from the sixth round of Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. Notes 1. Howcroft and Rubery 2018. 2. Goldin, Kerr and Olivetti 2024. paying roles, are substantially underrepresented in men report greater use of AI for work across all lev- C- suite positions, experience higher turnover and els of education (chapter 6). Global internet traffic attrition and report lower self- confidence in their data also reveal that only 33 percent of ChatGPT skills.133 Women are also underrepresented among users are women.134 Over time women’s lower adop- AI users. Our survey finds that 37 percent of women tion of generative AI could exacerbate labour market are AI users, compared with 41 percent of men. But inequalities. 116 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 In addition to the gender digital divide, which per- The media plays a role in reinforcing and perpet- sists in much of the world, women’s lower adoption of uating social norms. Media stereotyping can influ- AI could be driven by gender differences in perceived ence audiences’ attitudes, opinions and behaviours. economic risks and benefits.135 Women also report Women are less likely to appear in portrayals of AI. greater privacy and trust concerns while using gen- For example, only 8 percent of AI engineers portrayed erative AI.136 In general, women are more concerned in the most influential AI- related films are women.146 about the negative consequences of sharing data.137 This finding is crucial, as media representation of These concerns are not unfounded, as women are professions has a strong impact on people’s career more likely to encounter negative experiences on- choices and prospects.147 The AI technological space line. Indeed, one of the most egregious ways in which is often constructed and represented as male dom- gendered power imbalances are inscribed into tech- inated, thus reinforcing structural stereotypes and nology design and use is technology- facilitated vio- prejudice. Given AI’s extensive mediatization and lence against women (box 4.2). widespread adoption, the biases are likely to rever- These norms and inequalities have a direct bear- berate widely, negatively affecting not only women’s ing on women’s agency.138 Women receive less visi- self- perceptions but also the collective evaluation bility and recognition for their contributions and are of their competence in technological fields. Gender often misrepresented. For instance, women scien- prejudices are also reflected in science and misinfor- tists get lower visibility for their work on social media mation discourse online. Specifically, science vide- compared with men.139 Women are also less likely to os on TikTok and YouTube stereotypically associate self- promote their work on social media — often due women with topics related to children and health.148 to undervaluation of their own work and fear of push- Furthermore, social media messages with gender back.140 But even when they do, the increase in recog- cues receive more engagement (views and likes) than nition and engagement online is smaller for women those without. Thus, social media platforms — which than for men.141 To be clear, gender inequalities in promised to democratize access to communication scholarly recognition existed long before social me- opportunities — may instead reify pre- existing norms dia.142 But social media appears to reinforce rather and inequalities. The misrecognition, misrepresenta- than alleviate structural disadvantages for women.143 tion and devaluation of women’s contributions in the Gender norms also permeate seemingly open forms technological field not only deny them opportunities of communication that allow decentralized commu- but also deprive societies of alternative perspectives, nities and knowledge. paths and choices. “ As the foregoing discussion illustrates, gender inequalities in the design and use of AI Expanding women’s agency to not just benefit equally result not from women’s lower technological from but to shape technological and social change aptitude, interest or skills. Rather, they arise from discriminatory social norms As the foregoing discussion illustrates, gender ine- qualities in the design and use of AI result not from Case in point is the open software community, which women’s lower technological aptitude, interest or promotes openness and transparency. Women are skills. Rather, they arise from discriminatory social largely excluded from these collectives or rendered less norms that construct technology as masculine and visible relative to their male counterparts even though devalue women’s expertise, knowledge and contri- they have comparable programming aptitude. An butions. Therefore, closing gender gaps, perhaps analysis of the code written for 1,728 open-s ource pro- by increasing access to technology and digital skills jects archived in the GitHub repository reveals gender training — crucial as they are — may not be enough. variation in style (that is, file organization and struc- The focus needs to be on expanding women’s agency ture) but not in code quality.144 And women on Stack to not just benefit equally from technological change Overflow receive less recognition for their work — even but to shape technological developments that reflect after exerting more effort in their contributions.145 and actively promote equity and social change. CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 117 Box 4.2 As technologies advance, so do new ways of perpetrating violence against women One of the most grievous consequences of advances in digital technologies has been the alarming rise of technology- facilitated gender- based violence around the world. Technology-f acilitated gender- based violence is “any act that is committed, assisted, aggravated or amplified by the use of information communication technologies or other digital tools which results in or is likely to result in physical, sexual, psychological, social, political or economic harm or other infringements of rights and freedoms.”1 This abuse is differentiated because women and girls are attacked simply for being online and for being women or girls. These forms of violence are widespread.2 Globally, 38 percent of women have experienced gender- based violence online, and 85 percent of women have witnessed it.3 Young women are particularly affected: 58 percent of young women across 31 countries experienced online gender- based violence.4 Such violence — comprising image- based abuse, trolling, online hate speech, cyberharassment, gendered disinforma- tion and other harms— undermines women’s wellbeing and agency. The manifestations, scope and scale of violence are constantly evolving as the rapid advance of technology pro- vides tools that can be abused to control, silence and coerce. The veil of anonymity possible in the digital world facilitates these forms of violence.5 And the automation capabilities enabled by AI amplify the scope and impact of violence against women.6 AI technologies, particularly generative AI, put novel methods in perpetrators’ hands that can boost the reach and scale of violence against women. AI-g enerated image-b ased abuse, also known as deepfake pornography, refers to fake, digitally altered images created using AI and constitutes an emerging and growing form of nonconsensual synthetic intimate imagery.7 Deepfake pornography accounts for 98 percent of deepfake videos online, and 99 percent of individuals targeted in this content are women.8 But awareness of AI-g enerated image-b ased abuse remains low across countries.9 Generative AI can create sustained and automated attacks and automatically generate convincingly written posts, texts and emails.10 This gives existing harms such as hate speech, cyberharassment, misin- formation and impersonation a much wider reach and makes them more dangerous. Indeed, both open and closed AI models generate cyberharassment templates, synthesize fake reports and histories that damage people’s reputations, and modify images to portray people in nonconsenting scenarios.11 In addition, Internet-o f-Things devices such as smart speakers and thermostats can be weaponized to exercise control over and coerce women.12 These forms of violence are often perpetrated with the aim of silencing women and curtailing their agency. Indeed, women who engage in public spaces, including journalists, politicians and activists, are subjected to more virulent abuse.13 Some 73 percent of female journalists have experienced online gender-b ased violence.14 And 46 percent of female parliamentarians in Africa and 58 percent in Europe have been the target of sexist attacks online.15 As political, economic, social and cultural activities shift online, such forms of violence force women to withdraw from digital spaces. Women experience physical and mental health impacts, reputational damage, social ostracization and isolation, and adverse consequences for education and employment. Digital technologies and social media networks open opportunities for women and provide a platform to organize and participate in the public discourse. Although legal reforms that recognize and address technology-f acilitated gender- based violence are important, measures to combat such violence must coexist with measures to strengthen women’s agency and freedom of expression.16 Actions that target the structural root causes of violence — for instance, providing education on technology- facilitated gender- based violence, designing technologies with safety at the core, ensuring platform accountability and increas- ing women’s representation in product design and content moderation teams— are critical. Notes 1. UN Women and WHO 2023, p. 3. 2. Dunn, Vaillancourt and Brittain 2023; Sheikh and Rogers 2024. 3. Economist Intelligence Unit 2021. 4. Plan International 2020. 5. de Silva de Alwis 2024. 6. de Silva de Alwis 2024. 7. Umbach and others 2024. 8. Security Hero 2023. 9. Umbach and others 2024. 10. UNESCO 2023. 11. UNESCO 2023. 12. Slupska and Tanczer 2021. 13. IPU and APU 2021; UNESCO 2020. 14. UNESCO 2020. 15. Inter- Parliamentary Union and African Parliamentary Union 2021. 16. de Silva de Alwis 2024. Enhancing women’s agency in the design and use leadership and participation engender. For instance, of technologies is crucial both to enhance opportu- evidence suggests that female researchers are more nities for women and to design and implement AI likely to work on socially beneficial innovations.150 technologies that reflect diverse societal needs.149 Transformative social change can take place when Women’s underrepresentation results in societies los- innovations in AI are designed by a diverse group of ing out on the important innovations that women’s developers, including women and people from other 118 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 marginalized and intersecting identities; when those languages.159 Demographic biases arise when the innovations recognize and address social norms and training data overrepresent or underrepresent certain imbalances; and when they are backed by changes groups, leading the model to exhibit biased behav- in policies and institutions. For instance, researchers iour towards them. In these cases the outputs ampli- are developing AymurAI, a semiautomated proto- fy self- fulfilling feedback loops that can perpetuate type that will collaborate with criminal court officials inequalities.160 Stereotype perpetuation and cultural in Argentina and Mexico to generate and maintain denigration are examples of representational harms, anonymized datasets for understanding gender- which occur when systems reinforce the subordina- based violence.151 SOFIA is a conversational chatbot tion of some groups along the lines of identity — race, designed to support women who have experienced class, gender and the like.161 Even when a model ac- technology- facilitated gender- based violence on so- curately reflects real- world patterns identified as cial media platforms (see box 4.2).152 It supports users statistical regularities, it could still constitute rep- with reporting the incident on the platform, provides resentational harm because the patterns themselves digital self- care tips and evaluates whether an inci- reflect historical prejudice.162 For instance, such a sys- dent can be reported to the police. Thus, ensuring tem could perpetuate a lack of visible role models for women’s agency in the design and use of AI is not just underrepresented groups. a matter of providing equal opportunities for women; it profoundly shapes what kinds of technologies are “ Biases can emerge at different stages of developed, for whom and with what purpose. model development and deployment. They can range from negative sentiment and Technical solutions are not enough: toxicity directed towards some social groups Biases in AI are deeply intertwined with to stereotypical linguistic associations to social norms and societal inequalities lack of recognition of certain languages Growing excitement over the impressive capabili- Cultural biases occur when large language mod- ties of generative AI tools has been accompanied by els learn and perpetuate cultural stereotypes or hier- immense scrutiny for their propensity to produce archies that are present in the data used for training. socially biased outputs.153 AI reflects the biases and This can result in the model producing outputs that stereotypes in the data on which it is trained. If the reinforce or exacerbate existing cultural prejudices or data used to train an AI model contain biases — either underrepresent cultures.163 Such biases also arise from from the source material or through the selection the fact that most of the internet’s content is in Eng- process — these biases can be absorbed by the model lish and a few other dominant languages. This can lead and subsequently reflected in its behaviour. Even to biased performance and a lack of support for low- though fine- tuning models after pretraining has re- resource languages or minority dialects. For instance, duced outputs that were extremely biased in early it- ChatGPT perpetuates gender defaults and stereotypes erations, these techniques pose risks, given that the assigned to certain occupations when translating be- processes often rely on human feedback.154 Language tween English and languages that use gender- neutral models are trained using extensive text corpora avail- pronouns, such as Bengali and Malay.164 able online, including websites, articles, books and other written content. These data contain persistent gender, racial, cultural and intersectional stereo- Bringing social insights into bias mitigation types; misrepresentations of particular social groups and cultures; and denigrating language.155 To mitigate these biases, a range of technical solu- Biases can emerge at different stages of model tions have been adopted, including augmenting development and deployment.156 They can range datasets to debias imbalanced social group rep- from negative sentiment and toxicity directed to- resentations,165 fine- tuning models with fairness ob- wards some social groups157 to stereotypical linguis- jectives166 and developing metrics to test and evaluate tic associations158 to lack of recognition of certain models.167 But biases are hardly just technical. AI is CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 119 not neutral; it reproduces and amplifies social biases biases — these advances have largely been reactive. and inequalities. This broader perspective can help Both alignment techniques and evaluation metrics179 identify pathways for further improvement. In re- have so far focused mostly on reducing explicit bias- sponse to the growing attention to the social harms es, which are easier to detect. In addition to reacting reinforced and amplified by large language models, to instances of harm as they arise, it is imperative to the models are aligned with human values before design technologies with a forward-l ooking lens .180 they are deployed.168 Alignment techniques— s uch as reinforcement learning with human feedback169 — have made remarkable progress in reducing biases What is fairness in AI? in the models’ outputs.170 The impact of these inter- ventions in generating outputs that are not as biased AI fairness is context dependent and can be inter- as the training data can be seen in recent large lan- preted in multiple ways.181 Numerous definitions guage models (such as ChatGPT) that, in response to of algorithmic fairness have been advanced in the prompts asking them to generate stories for different literature — which can be mutually incompatible.182 occupations, predominantly feature female charac- The form of the loss function, or the reward given ters, even for occupations that are predominantly in reinforcement learning, implicitly assumes some held by men in most countries.171 notion of fairness. Harms often operate in nuanced These bias mitigation techniques have, however, and distinct ways for various social groups. More- focused mostly on explicit biases — attitudes that are over, whether disparities are objectionable may differ blatantly prejudicial and discriminatory. But biases across cultures and may change over time as social can appear more subtly, such as the tendency to asso- norms evolve. For example, because many demo- ciate historically marginalized groups with negative graphic characteristics are socially constructed and sentiments even when people espouse egalitarian vary across contexts, specifying and operationalizing beliefs.172 As training data scale and model parame- diversity are inherently fraught with complexity.183 ters increase, explicit bias shows a consistent decline, Treating social groups or their outcomes as inter- but bias often remains.173 Even value- aligned models changeable ignores the underlying forces of injustice. associate negative attributes with the words “black” Recent attempts at debiasing language models have and “dark,” such as guilty phrases and weapon ob- led to overrepresentation of some groups in ways jects.174 And these models associate women’s names at odds with the real world. For example, large lan- and roles with home, humanities and powerless guage models often depict female characters more words.175 frequently than male ones in stories about various occupations, showing a 37 percent deviation from “ Biases can appear more subtly, such as the US Bureau of Labor Statistics data.184 And women tendency to associate historically marginalized are substantially overrepresented in crime scenarios groups with negative sentiments even when compared with data from the US Federal Bu- when people espouse egalitarian beliefs reau of Investigation.185 So, the assumptions encoded in the choice of loss function should be stated explic- Implicit biases can be powerful sources of discrim- itly. Conceptualizing fairness involves value judge- ination in various downstream tasks. For example, in ments that need to be made explicit. For example, GPT- 4’s output men lead career workshops, are the deeming certain AI model behaviours as harmful in- leaders and study science.176 This is despite the fact volves decisions underpinned by social values. This that GPT- 4 overwhelmingly disagrees with blatantly requires a better understanding of why AI biases are biased statements such as “women are bad at man- harmful, in what ways and to whom.186 aging people.”177 It chooses Ben (man- coded name) To understand and address these effects, they must over Julia (woman- coded name) for a management be considered in the social context that they emanate workshop.178 from and that they shape.187 More generally, it has Even if we focus on the substantial progress of been argued that it is meaningless to ascribe fairness bias mitigation — particularly in addressing explicit without that social context as an attribute of models, 120 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 as opposed to actions, outputs or decision processes concept of fairness appropriate to the context of use. in the real world.188 For instance, word embeddings The design of strategies and techniques has to recog- in large language models are representations of lin- nize that technical solutions are unlikely to be suffi- guistic units in a multidimensional space in which the cient on their own. They must be complemented with model is able to find statistical associations; but they interventions to recognize and address structural so- do not correspond to any linguistic or decisionmaking cial hierarchies and power imbalances. task. So, lacking any notion of ground truth or harms to people, it is not meaningful to ask fairness ques- Framing a narrative on AI to tions about word embeddings without reference to advance human development specific downstream tasks for which they might be used.189 Public concerns about the societal effects of AI are Existing algorithmic fairness techniques often shaped by narratives that have the potential to influ- focus on what is convenient to measure and mitigate, ence research priorities and policy agendas on the di- devoting less if any attention to what is most con- rection of technological change. A narrative premised cerning from a human development perspective.190 on the importance of advancing human development Fairness benchmarks based on unstated assumptions can inspire regulatory, institutional and social choic- can lead to inconsistencies surrounding both the es that make AI work for people everywhere. Such a conceptualization and the operationalization of con- narrative recognizes and elevates human agency, is cepts.191 For instance, four prominent benchmarks rooted in understanding AI in different social con- for assessing fairness in the context of natural lan- texts and can serve as a framework to supplement ex- guage processing (CrowS- Pairs, StereoSet, WinoBias isting metrics for assessing AI progress with a view to and WinoGender) left culturally heterogeneous and enabling choices that advance human development. highly contested concepts such as stereotypes and of- fensive language unspecified.192 Cultural norms and values can vary considerably across communities and Elevating human agency to shape regions, and large language models do not reflect this the deployment of AI diversity.193 Determining which norms should be en- coded in AI models and which should be filtered out AI’s impact on society is neither preordained nor in- is a complex task that requires careful consideration evitable. It could engender many possibilities — with and a nuanced understanding of diverse cultural both positive and negative implications for human perspectives. Further, these approaches need to rec- development.195 As this chapter shows, a techno- ognize the ways in which language and social hierar- determinist narrative can lead us astray. chies are built into and reinforced by technologies. Recognizing and elevating agency counter narra- tives on AI that are fixated on machines surpassing or, “ Determining which norms should be worse, replacing humans and diminishing the value encoded in AI models and which should be of and undermining human agency.196 This not only filtered out is a complex task that requires undermines the value of human effort and ingenuity careful consideration and a nuanced but also fundamentally misconstrues what being an understanding of diverse cultural perspectives intelligent human being is.197 Human intelligence is rooted in our embodied physical and emotional expe- Achieving algorithmic fairness would require de- riences and often depends on participation in social fining what “fair” means in the context of appli- and cultural environments. A narrative emphasiz- cations.194 Public deliberation on these norms and ing the primacy of human choices and freedoms in values must recognize and create space for diverse the age of AI can inform the design and deployment ideas and perspectives. Creating fair AI systems ul- of AI systems that focus on enhancing — rather than timately has to be continuous and collaborative. It undermining — human agency. involves deliberating on shared social values that Agency makes people creative, adaptable, resilient, would guide choices among tradeoffs and arrive at a cooperative and diverse. It enables people to act, not CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 121 just in their own self- interest but in shaping broad- the voices of the people and groups most affected er processes of social change.198 Narratives typical- by AI has ramifications for how technologies are de- ly come from the sustained mobilization of people signed, deployed, used and regulated. Attitudes to- and communities. As the examples in this chapter wards and approaches to understanding AI are not show, rather than passive beneficiaries or victims the same around the world. Tropes such as AI as the of technological change, people — both individual- ultimate solution to all problems yet at the same time ly and collectively — are active in shaping the impact the ultimate threat to humanity — and the reduction of new technologies. Past episodes of technological of the individual to data and computation — ignore change — from the Industrial Revolution to the rise of how outcomes depend on the interaction between AI the internet — bear witness to the power of collective and social choices.202 It is thus imperative to develop action in drawing attention to the most pernicious a better understanding of the diversity of views about consequences of new technologies, mobilizing broad what AI is and its role in society and human develop- coalitions for change and instigating institutional re- ment should be across cultures, extending beyond forms. As AI becomes integrated across key societal WEIRD (western, educated, industrialized, rich and institutions and functions, researchers, civil society democratic) countries.203 Expanding people’s agency organizations and activists have identified and ex- is thus pertinent both to safeguard choices and free- posed its adverse impacts on marginalized communi- doms and to ensure that AI technologies are useful ties, demanding accountability and catalysing policy for everyone everywhere to live lives they value and and design changes. Indeed, grassroots movements have reason to value. and coalitions have surfaced and drawn public atten- tion to the inequalities and injustices associated with deploying technologies such as facial recognition sys- Rooting the future of AI in social contexts tems and algorithms that automate criminal justice decisions. They have also mobilized people to im- Dominant narratives tend to propagate claims about agine and shape a different future with AI. AI (or technology) as inherently emancipatory or op- Researchers and advocates — particularly those be- pressive. Those extreme views not only undermine longing to marginalized communities — have played human agency — they also neglect the role of social a pivotal role in revealing some of this type of harm context in shaping the impact of AI. The term “AI” re- from AI. Their relative exclusion from AI design, as fers not to a specific technology but to a wide range well as from policymaking around it, risks the emer- of computational techniques, from logic- based au- gence of a monoculture around AI. Narratives about tomated decision systems to large language models AI tend to be told by a narrow set of people, mostly based on deep neural networks.204 Each technique political and economic elites with specific interests comes with affordances and constraints and gives in its development.199 But technical approaches alone rise to different ethical, technical and social risks are insufficient. Solutions need to consider societal depending on its use case. For example, mobilizing factors to avoid compounding some of AI’s negative AI and big data to convey local needs from a dis- consequences.200 tance may risk perpetuating epistemic injustices and paternalistic practices in the humanitarian sec- “ Tropes such as AI as the ultimate solution to tor (Spotlight 4.3).205 The same system may perform all problems yet at the same time the ultimate very differently for different people in different con- threat to humanity — and the reduction of texts. For example, generative AI would have very the individual to data and computation different outcomes depending on infrastructure, in- — ignore how outcomes depend on the stitutional capacity, regulations and social norms. interaction between AI and social choices Designing and deploying technologies often involve difficult tradeoffs — between accuracy and fairness, In processes where decisions — both technical and for instance — and must be evaluated on a case- by- social — about AI are made, different groups are situ- case basis — with the participation of the people af- ated unequally in power and awareness.201 Excluding fected.206 Narratives that propagate totalizing claims 122 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 are unhelpful — and harm public discourse on the re- performance of these models on real- world tasks.215 spective values, priorities, tradeoffs and consequenc- Nonetheless, benchmarks have been useful in iden- es that may arise as a result of using AI in a particular tifying social harms.216 Quantitative measurements context. They shift priorities from the more immedi- such as Correctional Offender Management Profil- ate impacts towards far- fetched future scenarios. And ing for Alternative Sanctions217 and Gender Shades218 in doing so, they sow fear and may give rise to misin- have set in motion some of the most influential formed regulations. changes in AI systems and are indispensable for as- sessing progress.219 Still, a more fundamental gap persists. Improv- Supplementing benchmarks of AI progress ing scores on a benchmark does not mean that an AI system would expand human development. That is, More than three decades ago, the Human Develop- it does not reveal whether the system would enable ment Report challenged the dominant narrative in people to achieve functionings that they have reason development that focused exclusively on income to to value or would erode the space for exercising val- assess the progress of economies and societies. It did ued choices. As this and other chapters in this Report so by introducing the human development approach have demonstrated, AI can either enhance freedoms — a novel framework for evaluating and advancing and opportunities for people or diminish their choic- human wellbeing and agency.207 Indeed, one of the es and agency. The direction it will go is contingent greatest achievements of the Human Development on the way it is designed and deployed and on wheth- Report has been to promote greater acceptance of the er appropriate policies and institutional mecha- fact that monetary measures such as gross domestic nisms are put in place. Carefully curated benchmarks product per capita are inadequate proxies of devel- grounded in the human development approach can opment. Its framework laid the foundations for alter- bolster action on these fronts. native metrics of human wellbeing, particularly the Human Development Index — which remains wide- “ The direction it will go is contingent on ly used. Subsequent Human Development Reports the way it is designed and deployed and on have revised and refined the metrics and developed whether appropriate policies and institutional new ones to capture other issues relevant to human mechanisms are put in place. Carefully curated development. A human development lens can help benchmarks grounded in the human development unearth the limitations of current metrics and inspire approach can bolster action on these fronts alternative metrics for evaluating the performance of AI in enhancing people’s capabilities and agency. Recently, concerns about the potential societal AI benchmarks are combinations of datasets and harms of AI systems have resulted in the develop- metrics that represent specific tasks and are used to ment and adoption of specific benchmarks to assess evaluate and compare the performance of AI sys- the risks posed by such systems.220 For example, the tems.208 The primary objective of many of these MLCommons AI Safety benchmark measures the benchmarks is to measure the technical capabilities safety of large language models by assessing their re- or performance of AI systems.209 These benchmarks sponses to prompts across multiple categories of im- have been found to often fall short in measuring AI pacts, including child sexual exploitation and suicide capabilities.210 They rarely measure what they claim and self-h arm.221 But these evaluations focus mostly to measure,211 can be easily gamed212 and are some- on the AI model itself. By contrast, impacts manifest times impractical for real- world uses.213 For exam- in complex interactions between the model and so- ple, benchmarks consisting of professional exams cial factors — comprising individuals and broader sys- such as the bar exam “emphasize the wrong thing” temic factors.222 and “overemphasize precisely the thing that lan- More generally, capabilities and risks are hardly at- guage models are good at” and are thus unreliable tributes of models alone. They emerge from complex measures of things such as legal skill.214 Performance interactions among models, people, organizations on the bar exam does not tell us anything about the and social and political systems. This is why existing CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 123 approaches to evaluating AI systems are insufficient, and efficiency), measured across 16 core scenarios.228 especially when it comes to evaluating their societal This ensures that tradeoffs are clearly exposed and impact.223 Many of the concerning issues that have that metrics beyond accuracy are not neglected. The garnered attention — notably misinformation and bias development of metrics invariably has to be an ongo- — are not a property of the model alone. Rather, they ing process that captures emergent impacts as they are a joint property of the model and of a population surface and constantly explores new methodologies of users who interact with a model in a particular way and data to measure the interactions among AI, peo- through a certain distribution of queries.224 Unfor- ple and society. tunately, data about these interactions are currently nonexistent.225 This problem is compounded by the “ Because the impact of AI systems spans proprietary nature of many AI systems.226 Therefore, economic, social, political and cultural research that focuses on empirically observing the dimensions, evaluating these systems interaction of people with large language models in should be a multidisciplinary exercise that different contexts and for different uses is critical to incorporates different methodologies and comprehensively assess capabilities and harms. makes space for diverse perspectives Ultimately, from a human development perspective evaluation of AI systems needs to be multidimensional, Current benchmarks are designed only for the continuous and interdisciplinary. No single metric English language and based on western cultures.229 can capture the multifaceted impacts that AI systems Developing benchmarks for low- resource languages have on people. Many of the identified harms of AI necessitates investment and effective collaboration systems are latent concepts that cannot be captured among researchers, native speakers and communi- in a single operationalization in their entirety.227 And ties. These benchmarks also focus on text- based AI evaluation of AI systems inescapably involves choices systems — making them limited for other modalities and value judgements that must be made explicit and such as images and audio.230 Because the impact of documented. In many instances different scores may AI systems spans economic, social, political and cul- have to be referred to in conjunction. For example, tural dimensions, evaluating these systems should the Holistic Evaluation of Language Models bench- be a multidisciplinary exercise that incorporates dif- mark adopts a multimetric approach (comprising ac- ferent methodologies and makes space for diverse curacy, calibration, robustness, bias, fairness, toxicity perspectives. 124 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 SPOTLIGHT 4.1 Narratives in economic decisionmaking Attention to narratives as influential determinants of fertility intentions, whereby positive future narra- economic outcomes contrasts with traditional eco- tives positively affect fertility intentions and nega- nomic approaches, which fail to examine the role of tive narratives produce the opposite effect.11 People narratives in major economic events.1 Burgeoning use these narratives to project themselves into an work in narrative economics seeks to study the ways actionable imagined future and make decisions that narratives spread and affect economic behaviour — are somewhat independent of their actual economic including decisions as diverse as whether to make an situation.12 For instance, in an experiment conducted investment or whether to have a child.2 Economic de- during the Covid-19 pandemic, respondents were ex- cisions often hinge on the belief or disbelief of certain posed to different scenarios regarding the expected stories because stories can influence expectations, length of the pandemic. The longer the expected du- inspire confidence or instil fear in economic agents.3 ration, the lower their fertility intentions.13 Empirical work has sought to document the influ- In addition to their role in understanding the envi- ence of narratives on economic behaviour. For in- ronment, focusing attention, predicting events and stance, an open- ended survey of macroeconomic motivating action, narratives also play an important narratives of households and experts finds that part in allocating social roles and identities, defin- household narratives are much more heterogenous ing power relations and establishing social norms.14 than expert narratives and strongly shape their in- Indeed, narratives are strategically employed by po- flation expectations.4 The media are an important litical agents to achieve a certain purpose. Political source of these narratives.5 agents discover identity and policy narratives that Of particular relevance is the role of narratives in shift beliefs about how the world works or about decisionmaking under conditions marked by radical identity to catalyse policy and institutional change in uncertainty.6 In contexts marked by radical uncer- a certain direction in line with their interests.15 Nar- tainty, “people use narratives to make sense of the ratives shape social identities, as people generally past, imagine the future, commit to action, and share make sense of their lives in terms of stories that are these judgments and choices with others.”7 Convic- influenced by their relations with others and their en- tion narrative theory asserts that “narratives arise vironment.16 Narratives also define power relations from the interplay between individual cognition and through their role in organizing perceptions around the social environment, with [people] adopting a nar- socially conferred characteristics such as expertise, rative that feels ‘right’ to explain the available data; legitimacy and social identification.17 Moreover, in using that narrative to imagine plausible futures; and addition to their role in specifying norms of behav- affectively evaluating those imagined futures to make iour, narratives also supply principles of application a choice.”8 rooted in particular social relationships.18 The role of narratives in a broad range of phe- Shared narratives can support coordination. They nomena have been studied — notably prices of cryp- usually propagate when they are appropriate to the tocurrencies9 and fertility decisions. Evidence context, are unforgettable and have popular appeal.19 indicates that narratives also carry substantial col- As such, ideas held collectively in a social network lateral effects on financial market expectations and can become the coordinating device for a range of de- economic decisionmaking.10 In a similar vein both cisions in a similar way to the role of prices.20 Narra- experimental and survey evidence have demonstrat- tives thereby set beliefs and inform action that carry ed the causal impact of narratives of the future on important macroeconomic consequences. This opens CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 125 the possibility for political leaders to reset narratives for economic events and in structuring institutions to change ideas about identities and norms in order to and policies. Second, reframing narratives can be a build social pressure towards support ing actions that powerful way to drive policy and institutional change, are in the common interest.21 precisely because of their role in setting beliefs and Two crucial insights emerge. First, paying attention perceptions and in influencing both individual and to narratives can help in anticipating and preparing collective behaviour. NOTES 1. Shiller 2020; Akerlof and Snower 2016. 10. Paugam, Stolowy and Gendron 2021. 2. Shiller 2020. 11. Guetto and others 2023. 3. Akerlof and Shiller 2010. 12. Guetto and others 2023. 4. Andre and others 2024. 13. Guetto, Bazzani and Vignoli 2022. 5. Guetto and others 2023. 14. Akerlof and Snower 2016. 6. Despite increased scholarly attention to narratives in economics, this term 15. Mukand and Rodrik 2018. is used and defined in multiple ways. Specifically, three roles have been 16. Akerlof and Snower 2016. ascribed to narratives in economics: narratives as interpretive summaries of specific issues, narratives as a means of policy analysis and narratives 17. Akerlof and Snower 2016. as active drivers of economic decisions. See Roos and Reccius (2024) for 18. Akerlof and Snower 2016. an overview of the literature. 19. Johnson, Bilovich and Tuckett 2023. 7. Johnson, Bilovich and Tuckett 2023, p. 2. 20. Collier and Tuckett 2021. 8. Johnson, Bilovich and Tuckett 2023, p. 1. 21. Collier and Tuckett 2021. 9. Azqueta- Gavaldón 2020. 126 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 SPOTLIGHT 4.2 Caring through digital platforms Digital labour platforms can increase the labour force work and wages on these platforms is dictated by a participation of women, particularly from marginal- rating system. While workers are under constant ized groups, by facilitating access to labour markets. pressure from this system, they may be unable to rate This promise is often based on the flexibility afforded customers or flag abusive customers.7 For instance, by these digital platforms for women to balance paid women on South Africa’s SweepSouth platform are work with household responsibilities.1 A burgeoning required to provide quality cleaning services, as this platform care economy for domestic, cleaning and affects their ratings and future access to work. But care- related work has emerged around the globe. workers are rarely given sufficient information about Such platforms act as intermediaries for allocating how big the house is.8 In addition, workers who can- and assigning care work. The platforms have been cel or refuse a task, or resist doing extra work that viewed as solutions to the demand- and supply- side was not initially specified in their booking, can be challenges in care. These novel technologies offer the penalized.9 Further, workers can have their accounts possibility of reorganizing the demand and supply of deactivated or suspended without any recourse if work to foster flexibility and personalization by ad- their ratings fall below a particular threshold or if dressing information asymmetries between workers they repeatedly refuse bookings.10 and clients. Platform work by its very nature reduc- In certain countries wages on these platforms are es barriers to entry because it involves an automat- higher than those for offline work. But work on these ed signup process, allows for flexible work schedules platforms is inconsistent, and the potential for high- and permits both platforms and workers to make er earnings could be offset by the time spent looking fewer commitments.2 for suitable opportunities and commuting between Participation in the platform does not inevitably locations.11 Platform companies also charge high bring about better working conditions for women.3 commission rates from workers.12 Thus, platforms set Platform work attracts workers who experience pre- the conditions of work and wages, interface between carity and vulnerability on account of gender, race, workers and employers, collect data about both care immigration status, caste and ethnicity.4 Therefore, workers and care recipients and take a substantial while platforms offer opportunities, they can also ex- proportion of workers’ earnings in the form of com- ploit workers who depend on them disproportionate- missions and deposits.13 ly and have fewer avenues to organize and challenge Misclassifying workers on platforms as self- unfair working conditions.5 This is partly because of employed, independent contractors or partners may information asymmetries between platforms and allow platforms to circumvent labour laws and reg- workers. The workers on these platforms — mostly ulations, further marginalizing domestic workers, poor women — often toil under exploitative condi- who are often migrant women.14 The platforms fail to tions marked by long and irregular hours, wage pre- serve the needs of women, who constitute a majori- carity, negative impacts of algorithmic management ty of their workers, and to protect and promote their practices and harassment.6 The flexibility propagated safety. Sexual harassment at work is a major concern by the platform can be a myth because women often for care and domestic workers because they work in have to work longer hours and at odd times of the day. confined environments in their client’s homes.15 Still, Flexibility frequently becomes a tool for legitimiz- technological features and policies to ensure the safe- ing double shifts for women, who have to juggle paid ty and security of care workers are usually missing and domestic work. For instance, the availability of from many of these platforms.16 CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 127 Digital platforms by and large cater to the needs action. Digital technologies become important tools of time- poor rich households that can afford to pay for these workers to find each other, discover com- for care while relying on an underpaid feminized munities and solidarities and articulate shared ex- workforce whose care needs remain unmet.17 Thus, periences. These efforts culminated in the largest it makes care available for some, while precluding nationwide labour action by female gig workers it for others.18 For instance, women working on care working with Urban Company in India to resist algo- platforms in Thailand struggle to balance the de- rithmic management practices and account deactiva- mands of platform work with their family responsibil- tions. Women have drawn on digital technologies, as ities. These women often have to rely on other family well as informal kin networks, to coordinate protest members such as grandparents to take care of their actions against digital labour platforms, with the sup- children.19 In fact, women with caregiving responsi- port of the established trade union movement.24 bilities are often penalized on these platforms due to In some countries female platform workers have their inability to take up work at short notice or at odd developed cooperatives. These workers use app- hours.20 based technologies to organize while preserving fair Even so, workers on these platforms have exer- compensation for workers and promoting job securi- cised their agency to resist the working conditions on ty. For example, Equal Care in the United Kingdom25 these platforms. Digital communication tools facili- and Up & Go in New York26 were both founded by tate new modes of connecting workers and activists women to shift power to the hands of platform work- across distances. Carers who work in isolation in pri- ers. The expansion of women- owned platform coop- vate homes have long been deemed unorganizable.21 eratives constitutes an opportunity to advance a more But digital communication tools have bolstered their inclusive reorganization of work in the digital econ- ability to build and maintain grassroots movements omy. Still, platform cooperatives struggle to expand and raise public awareness for their concerns. It was and survive amid stiff competition from more power- exactly this opportunity that the National Domes- ful digital platforms.27 So, public policies that support tic Workers Alliance — a leading voice for the respect women- owned platform cooperatives are key to bol- and dignity of domestic workers in the United States stering alternative ways of leveraging digital platform — leveraged to organize workers on the Handi plat- technologies to contribute to quality care and decent form.22 Through organizing efforts and negotiations work. over two years, the workers won an agreement that Even digital labour platforms could improve work- includes minimum wages, paid time off, occupational ing conditions — through, for example, offering more accidents insurance and a formal process to address than minimum wage and regulating work hours.28 workplace concerns. Likewise, domestic workers on State support is paramount, including on research India’s Urban Company and South Africa’s Sweep- and innovation, public services and infrastructure, South platforms used Facebook and WhatsApp to and social protection systems. In reality, policy inter- share information and opportunities, request assis- ventions and institutional responses have to account tance, vent their frustrations and reclaim a sense for context, recognize structural norms and imbal- of dignity.23 ances in the care sector and reflect the voices of those In some instances these forms of coordinated in- historically marginalized and excluded from techno- dividual resistance have coalesced into collective logical advances. 128 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 NOTES 1. Anwar 2022. 14. Kalla 2022; Rodríguez-M odroño, Agenjo- Calderón and López-I gual 2022; Sibiya and du Toit 2022. 2. Kalla 2022; Tandon and Sekharan 2022. 15. Dhar and Thuppilikkat 2022. 3. Rani and others 2022. 16. Athreya 2021. 4. Rodríguez- Modroño, Agenjo- Calderón and López- Igual 2022; Ticona and Mateescu 2018. 17. Fraser 2016. 5. Rodríguez- Modroño, Agenjo-C alderón and López- Igual 2022. 18. Green and Lawson 2011. 6. Hussein 2022; Rodríguez- Modroño, Agenjo-C alderón and López- Igual 19. Just Economy and Labor Institute 2022. 2022. 20. Just Economy and Labor Institute 2022. 7. Tandon and Rathi 2021. 21. Hobden 2015. 8. Kalla 2022; Sibiya and du Toit 2022. 22. National Domestic Workers Alliance n.d.; Zundl and Rodgers 2021. 9. Sibiya and du Toit 2022; Tandon and Sekharan 2022. 23. Dhar and Thuppilikkat 2022; Sibiya and du Toit 2022. 10. Kalla 2022; Sibiya and du Toit 2022. 24. Dhar and Thuppilikkat 2022. 11. Tandon and Rathi 2021. 25. https://www.equalcare.coop/. 12. Dhar and Thuppilikkat 2022; Tandon and Sekharan 2022. 26. https://www.upandgo.coop/. 13. UN Women 2023. 27. Salvagni, Grohmann and Matos 2022. 28. Sibiya and du Toit 2022. CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 129 SPOTLIGHT 4.3 Mobilizing big data artificial intelligence for localization: The risks of reproducing unequal power hierarchies Adam Fejerskov and Maria-Louise Clausen, Danish Institute for International Studies The convergence of technical advances in big data, ar- the 2016 Grand Bargain, this political agenda seeks tificial intelligence (AI) and algorithmic complexity, to empower local communities and local humani- along with the growing accessibility and affordability of tarian organizations by increasing funding, capacity services integrating these technologies, is transforming building, fostering equitable partnerships and estab- the humanitarian sector. Big data and AI are introduced lishing inclusive coordination platforms. to promote professionalization through standardiza- The backdrop to the localization agenda is a grow- tion, speed and perceived objectivity or to strengthen ing body of evidence showing that local participation empowerment by improving accessibility, transparency and leadership enhance global response effective- and broadening the stakeholder base.1 Over time, how- ness.4 The premise is that proximity to crisis leads ever, research has increasingly shown how this trend to faster and more contextually relevant responses, toward “digital humanitarianism” has also enabled re- but this aim is hindered by an entrenched hierarchy mote management techniques that sometimes sideline between international (often Western) humanitari- concerns about data regulation and privacy protection. an actors and locals—a category that itself has been It has raised questions about the dominance of private criticized for being reductionist. Despite a rhetoric of corporations in shaping the use and outcomes of “ex- partnership, equality and commitment to bottom-up tractive” data practices and systems that are designed decisionmaking, it is well documented that human- primarily with commercial objectives in mind.2 Recent itarian collaborations frequently result in hierar- developments reveal a merging of datafication with a chized relationships where local nongovernmental central priority in contemporary humanitarian affairs: organizations act as subcontractors with limited localization. Epitomized in political discussions around decisionmaking power.5 This has underscored a key the Grand Bargain agreement, launched at the World tension between inclusion and transformation.6 Humanitarian Summit in Istanbul in 2016, localization In this context of localization, AI and data-driven advocates shifting humanitarian responsibilities from tools are increasingly deployed to create a sense of international agencies to actors who are more closely “proximity” to targeted populations. By drawing on a embedded in affected communities. plethora of data sources, including satellite imagery, What happens when humanitarian actors mobilize social media feeds, local analytical gig work and mo- AI as a shortcut to localization? Are these emerging bile communication patterns, big data is deployed to technologies able to construe accurate depictions of generate real-time insights into the evolving dynam- local needs and demands? And what are the effects ics of particular crises. The integration of big data of these developments for representation, inclusion, spans numerous humanitarian efforts, from personal- and the wider ambitions of the localization agenda? ized healthcare, real-time environmental monitoring and crisis mapping to the registration of biometrical datapoints aimed at identifying and tracking indi- Datafied localization viduals or groups. These data-driven approaches in- fluence risk assessments, resource allocations and Localization aims to address the critique that human- decisionmaking in crisis response. In particular, the itarian efforts have been driven predominantly by extraction and utilization of big data under the guise Western responses to conflicts and disasters, often of localization stress three main concerns: fabricating sidelining local actors who historically received less context, rendering representation at a distance and than 0.3 percent of formal system funding.3 As part of reproducing power imbalances. 130 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Fabricating context appropriateness and sustainability of response and recovery efforts. The localization agenda advocates for a paradigm shift towards empowering local actors, assuming that proximity enables quicker and more efficient re- Rendering representation at a distance sponses to humanitarian crises. But using AI and big data tools to make human suffering commensurable Representation is central to humanitarian action be- across borders sometimes rests on an individualist or cause it ensures the inclusion of diverse voices and universalist ontology of needs, which risks reinforcing perspectives in decisionmaking. Local representa- unequal power hierarchies within humanitarianism. tion, in particular, fosters accountability and legiti- While big data can seem void of context, all data macy, as it reflects the needs and priorities of affected are local, embedded within sociotechnical, cultural communities. This is integrated into the localization and organizational contexts.7 As such, the representa- agenda, which seeks to transfer responsibilities, ca- tion of a humanitarian crisis from a distance through pacities and resources to local actors. Beyond efficient big data risks resulting in abstracted representations disaster management it emphasizes fair representa- of people and social phenomena. This constitutes a tion as a normative ideal, addressing broader discus- fabrication of context, signifying a shift from view- sions on rights and justice. ing big data as contextless to seeing it as offering an Representation often begins from the point of who image of an empirical reality crafted from real-time is rendered visible, as invisibility through lack of doc- microdata, rich in detail but detached from specific umentation and data remains a key concern at the geographical locations. These approximations then intersection of datafication and inequality. But rep- inform recommendations for action across countries resentation also confronts us with the question of or communities that may turn out to be generalized who and what remain local? but have localized consequences. The concept of local is inherently complex, with di- In this process context is reduced to an assortment verse definitions reflecting the lack of consensus in the of data points algorithmically assembled, produc- humanitarian community.9 One challenge stems from ing a specific perspective on reality. While big data is the relativity of the concept of local, as it is intertwined often presented as empowering, we must remember with spatio-geographical, social and identity distinc- that digital tools are not universally used, especially tions in crisis-affected countries and contexts. A stat- in times of crisis. Such approaches risk overlooking ic understanding of local as tied to a specific place or that global social media platforms vary in their use locale struggles to encompass diaspora, migrants and across contexts, and words or phrases carry distinct internally displaced people, sparking calls for a critical meanings depending on their cultural or situation- approach to localism. This perspective views the local al setting.8 Despite the Western-centric perspective as highly contextual and relational, focusing on the that often accompanies AI trained predominantly processes through which the label is constructed.10 on English language data, online data collection is As AI-driven representations of local realities still portrayed as less biased than traditional research emerge, defining local becomes even more pertinent. methods. But data need to be interpreted to become How are the boundaries of local defined and main- knowledge, and the diversity of local cultures, ex- tained in these recontextualized versions? The limi- pressions and media use renders the adaptation of tations of proximity as a defining factor for localism universal principles to local contexts exclusionary. become apparent, as individuals engaged in gig work As a result, the data-driven aggregated classifications may be physically close to humanitarian situations suggested by these new AI tools may produce gen- without truly being part of them or understanding eralizations that overlook marginalized voices. This those affected. Rather, this seems to align with de- concern is particularly substantial given the grow- scriptions of the humanitarian field as a quasi-market ing recognition that comprehending events, actions in which beneficiaries become “the means to an end.”11 and crises in their broader cultural, sociopolitical As already touched on, AI-enabled services of lo- and environmental contexts enhances the cultural calization accentuate the digital divide across access, CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 131 use and outcomes, especially for companies that de- which local organizations often operate.15 Although pend on social media for construing their geometries datafied localization can enhance technology’s reach of local needs and interests. by tailoring it to local conditions, it can also facilitate Many current services rely on convenience sam- remote management techniques, maintaining local pling, a methodology criticized for biases resulting organizations in contractual relationships with inter- from underrepresentation. When convenience (that national donors and potentially reinforcing existing is, access) becomes the sole criterion for inclusion, power imbalances.16 there is no mechanism to screen for sampling bias- Remote management enabled by datafied locali- es, raising doubts about both internal and external zation could exacerbate unequal power dynamics by validity. When informants are approached as users shifting risks onto local partners17 and introducing and gig workers in a market, biases often favour those new issues related to organizational accountability, with some resources to begin with. Thus, the inte- risk management and forms of ignorance.18 While gration of big data for localization not only bypasses local partners may undergo digital literacy training, it direct engagement with local actors or communities often concentrates on specific tools and applications but also enables humanitarian organizations to con- rather than building their overall capacity to use digi- tinue speaking on their behalf. In sum, emphasizing tal technology and data effectively and independently. big data–driven localization risks blurring the distinc- Introducing technology can enable more efficient tion between local elite perspectives and a reified in- extraction and commercialization of data by enti- terpretation of local as a fixed space whose concerns ties located predominantly in developed countries. can be readily extracted, transported and interpreted Herein, locals are reduced to data producers through across distances. gig work, thereby becoming part of territories from which data can be extracted and exploited from the distance. In these relationships employer responsi- Reproducing power imbalances bility becomes fragmented across long supply chains, with ultimate control lying solely with the client.19 Localization aims to reconfigure the humanitarian system by bolstering local decisionmaking power and agency to challenge entrenched hierarchies. Framed Conclusion as a means to enhance the reach, effectiveness and accountability of humanitarian action, localization This discussion shows how mobilizing AI and big ideally serves as a social justice endeavour.12 Yet data to convey local needs from a distance—what can current evidence indicates that data practices may be called datafied localization—risks perpetuating take on extractive forms.13 This raises concerns that epistemic injustices and paternalistic practices in the integrating big data into localization efforts risks humanitarian sector, if not pursued reflexively. Big perpetuating power imbalances by reducing local data does not remove questions of contextualization, communities to mere data providers or by bypassing representation and power hierarchies. Instead, ques- local humanitarian organizations. tions of what data are, who data represent and what The ongoing digital transformation of humani- data show remain a considerable structuring force for tarianism and the shift towards localization have delivering humanitarian support. Current attempts prompted discussions about the skillsets frontline at shortcutting localization stress the need for critical humanitarians need to implement technology- driven discussions of distance and proximity, as well as their solutions effectively.14 This transformation is envi- intersections with emerging technologies. While lo- sioned as a way to mitigate the consequences of the calization through AI datafication may ostensibly be growing gap between the complexity of digital tech- seen as a way to acknowledge local voices, a clos- nologies deployed by international humanitarian or- er look shows that the modes in which it is currently ganizations and the level of digital literacy among conceptualized risk reproducing power asymmetries local partners—a gap further exacerbated by the in ways that run counter to the core intentions of prevalence of short-term funding structures under localization. 132 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 NOTES 1. Mulder and others 2016; Raymond and Al Achkar 2016. 11. Krause 2014. 2. Duffield 2016; Fejerskov, Clausen and Seddig 2024; Sadowski 2019. 12. Roepstorff 2020. 3. Australian Red Cross 2017; Poole 2018; Seldon, Abidoye and Metcalf 2020. 13. Sandvik 2023. 4. Fox 2020; Honig 2018; Khoury and Scott 2024. 14. Frost, Khan and Vinck 2022. 5. ALNAP 2022; Kraft and Smith 2019; Schenkenberg and others 2020. 15. Ghorkhmazyan 2022. 6. Barnett 2018; Fast and Bennett 2020; Melis and Apthorpe 2020; Pailey 16. Elkahlout and Elgibali 2020. The authors refer to “remotely managed lo- 2020; Pincock, Betts and Easton-Calabria 2021. calized humanitarian action” and use the case of the Syrian Arab Republic to establish that remote management can facilitate localization, although 7. McCosker and others 2022. with ethical and legal risks for local nongovernmental organizations. 8. Costa 2018. 17. Duclos and others 2019. 9. Barbelet and others 2021; Wall and Hedlund 2016. 18. Fejerskov, Clausen and Seddig 2024. 10. Roepstorff 2020. 19. Mejias and Couldry 2024. CHAPTER 4 — FRAMING NARRATIVES TO REIMAGINE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE TO ADVANCE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 133 CHAPTER 5 Power, influence and choice in the Algorithmic Age 135 CHAPTER 5 Power, influence and choice in the Algorithmic Age Much of this Report focuses on the demand side of artificial intelligence (AI). This chapter shifts the lens to the supply side, asking what kinds of AI tools are developed, for what purposes and by whom. The chapter examines “power over” people: how AI producers and sometimes AI itself have the ability to affect people’s prospects (in positive and negative ways), alter their options (the choices they can exercise) or influence their beliefs and preferences (including what they value and have reason to value). 136 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Much of the Report’s analysis thus far has focused on consumer choice (perhaps through consumer lock- ins), artificial intelligence’s (AI) potential to give, or con- restrict entry by smaller and newer firms, shape the strain, people’s power to do things. For example, chap- direction of innovation away from socially desirable ter 1 explores the potential of large language models to outcomes,8 create single points of failure that harm cy- enable people currently excluded from accessing ad- bersecurity and operational resilience of critical infra- vanced expertise and know-h ow to have both in greater structure and make financial stability more vulnerable reach. This chapter moves from a discussion of “power to procyclical responses during financial stress.9 to” to an examination of how AI has and shapes “power over” people.1 Having “power over” means than an “ Market concentration raises several policy agent is able to affect others’ prospects (in positive and concerns, including the potential to limit negative ways), alter their options (the choices they consumer choice (perhaps through consumer can exercise) or influence their beliefs and preferences lock-ins), restrict entry by smaller and newer (including what they value and have reason to value).2 firms, shape the direction of innovation away Both the agent with power and those whom power is from socially desirable outcomes, create single exercised over have always been people. points of failure that harm cybersecurity But AI’s agentic characteristics (chapter 2) sug- gest that some AI models have agential power over At the same time the market for frontier foundation people.3 In classical programming digital tools were models is dynamic, fluid and characterized by intense simply executing a set of preprogrammed rules, and competition among dozens of AI labs. Several open- thus power could be mediated by those tools but was source models have been deployed.10 Although open- ultimately exercised by the programmer. In contrast, source models may be more vulnerable to misuse and AI models often operate beyond the effective control cyberattacks and their producers may sell comple- of the people who design and deploy them. This pre- mentary services in exclusive bundles that may limit sents a historically novel means of exercising power, competition,11 they offer more flexibility and potential adding to the many ways power has been exercised for customization that can enhance competition and over time — through laws, parental voices, regulato- innovation.12 The fluidity of the market implies that ry incentives, social norms and more.4 It also gives things can change quickly — for example, if one model those designing and deploying AI, on the supply side, acquires capabilities vastly superior and out of reach new means (intended or unintended) of exercising of others or if first- mover advantages entrench one power over people. That is the subject of this chapter. supplier, as in the dominance of ChatGPT up to 2024 Many are the possible threads to follow in this exami- — in both ways the market can tip from decentralized nation. An obvious one that has generated much public to heavily concentrated. Concentration can also hap- and policy interest relates to the market structure of the pen through vertical integration, with a few firms AI supply chain. One breakdown of this supply chain consolidating activities upstream, ranging from data includes five components: computing hardware, cloud to chips, and downstream, using their existing mar- computing infrastructure, data used to train AI models, ket reach to get to consumers.13 Concerns over market foundational models (such as GPT)5 and consumer- concentration are typically addressed by competition facing applications (such as ChatGPT and the hun- policy, but concentration in the AI supply chain raises dreds of thousands of applications that run on GPT and new issues potentially beyond the reach of competi- other foundational models; top panel of figure 5.1). A tion policy. For example, the digital economy, and AI few firms account for large shares of the market, par- in particular, brings new challenges in interpreting ticularly in hardware and AI applications (bottom panel and applying competition policies and determining of figure 5.1).6 Big technology companies (Big Tech) are which jurisdictions to do so in, given the international present to varying degrees across the supply chain in reach of several AI applications.14 Of course, the eco- different ways (sometimes dominating markets, as in nomic impacts of AI extend beyond market structure, cloud computing; in other cases investing in AI com- but the speed of change and vast scope of AI are cre- panies as shareholders). Market concentration raises ating different regulatory approaches across jurisdic- several policy concerns,7 including the potential to limit tions to deal with the many challenges.15 CHAPTER 5 — POWER, INFLUENCE AND CHOICE IN THE ALGORITHMIC A GE 137 Figure 5.1 The market structure of the artificial intelligence (AI) supply chain is concentrated The AI supply chain Microprocessors such Cloud platforms Text, video and audio Large AI models User-facing as graphics processing (infrastructure as a from the internet, such as BERT, Claude, applications such as u nits (GPUs), service) such as book repositories, GPT and Llama ChatGPT, FinGPT a pplication-specific Azure and AWS Wikipedia and and Gemini integrated circuits and proprietary data field-programmable gate arrays CLOUD TRAINING FOUNDATION AI HARDWARE COMPUTING DATA MODELS APPLICATIONS Market structure of the AI supply chain 5% 3% 33% 31% Others AMD Others AWS GPU revenue Cloud from data computingb centresa 92% 11% 25% NVIDIA Google cloud Azure Claude Perplexity 33% Big techse 5% 4% Gemini Others AAII Capital raised applicationsc by AI firmsd Poe 87% 67% ChatGPT Others a. Based on global revenue of graphics processing unit (GPU) producers for GPUs used in data centres in 2023. b. Based on global cloud computing revenue for the first quarter of 2024. c. Based on monthly visits data. d. Based on total capital invested in 2023 in firms active in AI and machine learning, as collected by PitchBook Data Inc. e. Corresponds to Alibaba Cloud Computing, Alibaba Group, Alphabet, Amazon Industrial Innovation Fund, Amazon Web Services, Amazon, Apple, Google Cloud Platform, Google for Startups, Microsoft, Tencent Cloud, Tencent Cloud Native Accelerator and Tencent Holdings. Source: Gambacorta and Shreeti 2025. Rather than focus on the market structure of the AI examination. That assessment depends on individual supply chain alone, this chapter starts with a frame- and public reasoning, with three elements to help de- work for interpreting how today’s AI is exercising termine whether the stakes are high: concentration, power over people and for considering what to bear in degree and scope (table 5.1).16 Building on the intuition mind as the AI supply chain continues to change and from market concentration, the first element is wheth- AI applications evolve and diffuse. er power is concentrated, not only in a market sense but Chapter 1 emphasizes that when AI outputs result in also with a broader meaning: the fewer the people ex- outcomes with high stakes, the need for human evalua- ercising power over a larger number, the more reason tion should be carefully considered. Stakes also matter there is to consider the stakes high. A niche AI applica- to assess whether “power over” warrants concern and tion in a narrow economic sector has lower stakes than 138 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Table 5.1 When do we confront high stakes? When outcomes, people also care about how that power is “power over” is concentrated and impacts deeply exercised — or what is described in political delibera- or across many dimensions of people’s lives tion as procedural legitimacy.24 Fields such as trust- worthy AI or responsible AI attend in part to this Element Description aspect.25 Procedural legitimacy includes such aspects Concentration The fewer the people exercising power as equal treatment under a source of power (say, the over a larger number, the higher the stakes law) as well as due process standards — for exam- Degree The greater the impact on people’s lives (property, freedom, life), the higher the ple, contesting how a decision was made. AI is often stakes opaque and does things beyond what it was designed Scope The more dimensions of people’s lives for, making it hard or impossible to meet these stand- affected (scope), the higher the stakes ards: one reason AI transparency and explainability Source: Human Development Report Office. matter.26 The higher the stakes, the more people care about the explainability of AI,27 including in medi- a firm making decisions on algorithms governing inter- cal applications, where accuracy is often not seen as actions in digital platforms that billions of people use. enough.28 Finally, who makes the decision matters, The second element is the degree to which people are particularly when the decision has implications for affected. The degree is higher when the impact touch- many people who may not have had the chance to in- es on someone’s property or, in more extreme cases, fluence it. Moreover, AI itself, in a sense, exercising freedom or life (chapter 1). Even more mundane uses of power over people raises new questions beyond con- AI, such as in automatic contracts in which lack of pay- sidering people who design and deploy AI.29 ment for a car loan blocks access to the car, may imply So, even though whether artefacts “have politics” a greater impact than how noncompliance would be is a longstanding debate in the history and culture of dealt with in the absence of AI.17 The impact can also be technology,30 AI- powered algorithms do wield power high if many people are affected in ways that are not di- not only to but also over.31 In the context of today’s rectly very consequential at the individual level but are AI- powered transformation, two forms stand out for substantial for a large group or society as a whole, as in human development: political deliberation.18 The third element is the scope • First is the unique and pervasive power that of impact, with the stakes higher when power is exer- algorithms have in mediating our social interac- cised over several dimensions of people’s lives. tions and social choices. The 2023/2024 Human When one or a combination of these elements im- Development Report found that nearly 70 percent plies high stakes, we should examine three aspects of the population feels they do not have a say in roughly linked to what power does, how it is exercised governmental decisions.32 This highlights a high and by whom.19 What power does relates to the sub- baseline level of disempowerment among the pub- stantive outcomes associated with designing and de- lic. A critical question is thus how this will evolve ploying AI. Understandably, this has been the focus of with AI’s ability to shape “power over.” attention given AI’s novelty and potential to affect out- • Second is the outsized power that a few people, comes for people and societies across many facets of companies and countries have in designing and life. There are multiple, often interrelated, strands of deploying AI. This has consequences for people’s work. AI safety focuses on avoiding accidental misuse choices and freedoms — how they are shaped by a or systemic risks.20 It also extends to concerns over ex- powerful new technology over which many have, istential risk.21 AI ethics has often been inspired by the so far, had precious little say.33 “do no harm” duty of medicine but has also considered concerns ranging from upholding human rights, pro- Algorithms shape social tecting privacy and addressing biases.22 More ambi- choices and power tious approaches seek to align AI with human values so that AI not only avoids harms but is also used for good.23 We live in a novel social reality where algorithms But even if it were possible to exercise power (many of them AI- based) mediate many of our social over people with AI systems that result in desirable relations and shape much of our engagement with CHAPTER 5 — POWER, INFLUENCE AND CHOICE IN THE ALGORITHMIC A GE 139 the world. Whether through social media, search Evolving power dynamics engines, online shopping or digital communication tools, algorithmic intermediaries are reshaping the In this sense algorithmic intermediaries are subtly landscape of human- to-human interactions, defin- shaping the fabric of society and influencing human ing the context and boundaries within which people relations and behaviour in ways both profound and engage.34 unseen. To examine in detail how AI “power over” Philosopher Seth Lazar calls this the algorithmic is manifested, take the recommender systems wide- city — articulating how computational machines have ly deployed in web search and digital platforms. This revolutionized interactions between people.35 In this type of AI is one of the most consequential ways shifting landscape new forms of power are taking that AI algorithms mediate and influence human shape.36 Think about how algorithms have funda- relations, interacting with social, political and eco- mentally altered the way we access and engage with nomic processes, shaped by and shaping economic information.37 We have attained extraordinary speed incentives, regulations and social norms (figure 5.3). in retrieving information; however, the reliability of Recommender systems shape how we navigate the that information, its source and authenticity are often infinite amount of information online, find the things opaque (figure 5.2).38 Consider the trust we place in we want to buy, connect with friends or follow people the ranking of web search results, and increasingly and events. also in searches using generative AI, despite having In 1971 computer scientist Herbert Simon argued little insight into the algorithms that determine their that in an information-r ich world, attention becomes order.39 Or reflect on the way algorithms in social a scarce resource.42 He identified the scarcity of at- media platforms shape narratives and distribute peo- tention in a world with abundant information as a ple’s attention, as shown below.40 Or think about how challenge in digital societies that requires filtering generative AI — trained using around 90 percent Eng- information to ensure that people can access what is lish materials41 — shapes our views and opinions about most relevant to them.43 The information throughput the world. of a human is estimated to be 10 bits per second.44 One Figure 5.2 Artificial intelligence transforming the way people retrieve information TIME SPEED OF INFORMATION RETRIEVAL TRANSPARENCY OF INFORMATION SOURCE Trusted messenger Library Internet search Large language model A trusted messenger Libraries provide Internet searches Large language models delivers the opinion a selection of facilitate quick access provide a single-output, or knowledge from a reputable to a multitude of near-instantaneous answer to single source, such as a sources for a sources of varying most queries. Though relying known expert. reader to query. quality and on a wealth of sources, the trustworthiness. process is opaque, and its reliability is not guaranteed. Source: Burton and others 2024. 140 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure 5.3 Recommender algorithms show how artificial intelligence is shaping social, economic and political processes AALLGGOORRIITTHHMMSS Social Political ss AA AAll gg oorriitt hh mm acceptability regulations llgg oo rriitthh mm ss Social Political processes processes Dating Recommendations recommendations SOCIETY of what news to consume Economic processes Economic goals Recommendations of platform providers of what to buy AAllggoorriitthhmmss Source: Wagner and others 2021. way people overcome this limitation is by working to- population.48 The typical model of recommender al- gether,45 but if a single human were to go through all gorithms in social media is fuelled by the behaviour- the content of the internet today, it could take over al record of users, with recommender algorithms half a billion years.46 As the amount of information optimized to keep users engaged on the platform.49 available in our increasingly digital world continues to Data to enable these algorithms to make recommen- expand, recommender algorithms channel our atten- dations come from what people do online, which has tion, seeking what is relevant to each person. A core raised concerns about privacy violations, potential challenge of leveraging the internet for human de- exploitation of people and manipulation of beliefs velopment is that the information people use to pro- and behaviours.50 From a human development per- mote their own agency and improve their capabilities spective these systems may also curtail human agen- far exceeds what anyone can reasonably consume. To cy by making choices on our behalf over what we overcome this limitation, algorithmic tools to search want to see — choices that may better reflect industry and filter information have come to define the mod- incentives than our own agency (box 5.1).51 ern internet. From early web searches and later so- The case of recommender systems allows for a cial media feeds to modern chatbots, our experience more concrete examination of the ways “power over” of the internet is filtered through some form of algo- is exercised. Recommender systems do more than just rithm, often AI- based recommender systems. regulate information flows — they shape the very con- That is also the case for social media,47 which has ditions in which people interact online. Think about 5.24 billion users, or almost two- thirds of the global how the law operates: it sets boundaries by prohibiting CHAPTER 5 — POWER, INFLUENCE AND CHOICE IN THE ALGORITHMIC A GE 141 Box 5.1 Recommendations in digital platforms and human development: Artificial intelligence as part of the problem, part of the solution? Artificial intelligence (AI) is not the issue with recommender systems, since any solution to improving online recommendations will likely require some form of AI.1 A core problem with current approaches is that they derive recommendations primarily from human behaviour, often simply to keep us engaged on the platform. People’s choices provide important information about what matters to them, but, as Amartya Sen forcefully argued, their choices cannot provide a full account of their motivations.2 Perhaps the most salient reason for this gap is that choice does not necessarily reflect a maximization of preferences and can be driven by other motives.3 For example, choosing to engage with misleading information online reflects a constraint in the quality of information available rather than a preference for false information.4 So, recommender systems based on behaviour do not provide an opportunity for people to ground recommendations on a broader set of aspects of what matters to them. This is key for human development, since it relates to the extent that people can exercise their agency and, ultimately, their freedom.5 From a human development perspective this is a fundamental concern, perhaps less visible than other problems, with behaviour- based recommendations, which include both the exploitation of what psychologist Daniel Kahneman called system- 1 thinking (behavioural biases that digital platforms exploit for engagement)6 and the difficulty of accounting for heterogeneity in preferences.7 Recommender systems could be giving poor recommendations,8 but more importantly they are shaping the choice architecture online and perhaps impoverishing the concept of what it means to be human, if what people do online is assumed to represent what people want to see.9 Recommender systems are thus biased to make people more passive recipients of online content, rather than active agents able to access what matters to them, potentially undermining people as moral agents through moral deskilling.10 Moreover, recommender systems optimized for engagement, particularly in social media, seek to maximize the attention users devote to the platforms and to give content producers more opportunities to have their creations seen. Of course, this is driven also by the revenue-g eneration model of the platforms, which is determined primarily through engagement by both content consumers and producers, with higher engagement providing more opportunity to sell advertising that can be targeted.11 There is an active debate on how to develop recommender systems optimized for things other than engagement, given some of the individual and collective harms associated with these systems.12 But whether recommender systems could be optimized for some- thing else relates also to the possibility of going beyond relying on online behaviour as the basis for recommendation, so that in addition to what people do online, recommendations could match who they are and what they value and have reason to value. One possibility is to use some sort of “middleware” that mediates between the digital platform and the users.13 But this would still not enable recommendations to reflect users’ preferences and beliefs. Another possible approach would be to use large language models, given their ability to call on other tools (say, a search engine or a calculator) to execute tasks that go beyond their immediate training or that are required by the user prompt.14 When recommender systems were first developed, algo- rithms could not engage in regular spoken language and could not explicitly reason the same way current models can.15 The flexibility and adaptability of large language models provide options to explore how they can be used as agents,16 if progress is made in addressing some of the inherent limitations of the technology,17 including privacy, security and trust concerns.18 A generative AI recommender agent could learn about what matters to the user by engaging conversationally — for example, by asking about what he or she values and has reason to value19 — and iteratively compile content that aligns with those values and preferences.20 Rather than taking human agency away from the interaction with digital platforms, these recommender agents could scaffold human agency in the interaction with online content.21 Notes 1. Li and others (2024) provide a survey of recent developments. See also Shen and others (2024). 2. Sen 1973, 1977. 3. Sen 1997. For a summary of Sen’s view on preferences and choice see, for instance, Anderson (2001). For a recent critique that extends to the broader challenge of framing AI alignment as being driven by the rational maximization of preferences, see Zhi- Xuan and others (2024). 4. Stewart and others 2024. 5. Sen 1985. 6. Agarwal and others 2024; Besbes, Kanoria and Kumar 2024; Kleinberg, Mullainathan and Raghavan 2024; Kleinberg and others 2024. 7. D. Chen and others 2024; Yao and others 2024. 8. Rita Gonçalves and others 2025. 9. Agan and others 2023. As noted above, there are also privacy concerns, with technical options being pursued to address these but without fundamentally changing the behaviour-b ased engine of the recommendation (Chronis and others 2024). 10. Schuster and Lazar 2025. 11. A different challenge relates to moderation, which deals with the choices that platforms make on what content to allow in order to comply with the law and each platform’s terms of service, as well as how to achieve those goals (outsourcing fact checking, using algorithms to detect prohibited content or having users flag noncompliant content). On moderation in digital platforms, see Douek (2022), Gorwa, Binns and Katzenbach (2020) and Lai and others (2022). On tensions between free speech and moderation and ways of addressing them, see Kozyreva and others (2023). Moderation and recommender systems optimized for engagement might not be independent, because content that elicits more engage- ment is often extreme and close to the bounds of what is accepted, so there might be an inherent tradeoff between effective moderation and current recommender systems (Narayanan and Kapoor 2024). 12. Bernstein and others 2023; Cunningham and others 2024; Ho and Nguyen 2024; Jia and others 2024a; Kazienko and Cambria 2024; Singh and Joachims 2018; Stray 2020; Stray and others 2024; B. Wang and others 2023. 13. Hogg and others 2024. 14. Askari and others 2024; Pentland and Tsai 2024. 15. Lazar and others 2024. 16. Kapoor and others 2024b; Wang and others 2025; Xi and others 2023. 17. For applications in medicine and healthcare as an example, see Kim and others (2024), Kim and others (2025) and Wang and others (2025). For applications that include but go beyond medicine, see Wölflein and others (2025). 18. Andreoni and others 2024. 19. Danry and oth- ers 2023. 20. As proposed by Schuster and Lazar (2025). 21. Lazar 2024b; Schuster and Lazar 2025; Whitt 2024. Some emerging examples of related approaches include Irvine and others (2023), Jia and others (2024b), Paul and others (2024), Yuan and others (2024) and Zhao and others (2024). 142 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 certain actions, otherwise presuming a baseline of the advent of generative AI (spotlight 5.1).61 Gener- freedom. In contrast, recommender systems start ative AI may exacerbate challenges ranging from from the opposite end, where people’s choices are making political microtargeting more persuasive and shaped by what the recommender system suggests or scalable62 to the potential for political bias in outputs determines is feasible. By governing the rules and pol- produced by generative AI models.63 And yet, it is icies of data curation and moderation, digital media crucial to avoid the technodeterminism examined in platforms today shape “power over.” Platforms de- chapter 4 and attributing to technology causal harms cide how to up- rank or down- rank posts, flag and re- that may often have more to do with underlying psy- move content, suggest new contacts or altogether chological, social, and political challenges.64 ban a user, curbing their overall social engagement in that space.52 These decisions have far-r eaching conse- “ Generative AI may exacerbate challenges quences for social choices and prospects.53 ranging from making political microtargeting Recommender systems not only arbitrate power more persuasive and scalable to the potential over individuals — they also redefine power relations for political bias in outputs produced by between them.54 They can allow behaviours that are generative AI models. And yet, it is crucial to malicious or abusive, excluding or harming segments avoid technodeterminism and attributing to of the population.55 By shaping power relations be- technology causal harms that may often have tween the people they mediate, algorithmic inter- more to do with underlying psychological, mediaries enable some users to exert influence over social, and political challenges others, affecting their prospects and choices. More- over, as a result of numerous, repetitive social inter- Still, consider how AI is making “hypersuasion” actions, recommender systems are reconfiguring possible — that is, influencing beliefs and behaviours societal structures, including social norms, institu- by crafting language aligned to its users’ psychologi- tions and culture — reshaping political discourse and cal profiles. Large language models can generate re- deliberation.56 sponses based on users’ specific profiles — such as their personalities, moral values or political ideolo- gies.65 Information about users’ profiles can be mined Automated power and its implications from online behaviour — such as online readership, so- cial media activities, shopping patterns and feedback As algorithms upend power relations, they operate on large language models. Hypersuasion in turn can like multipliers, enabling fewer people to have bigger generate behaviour or shape attitudes, raising ethical impacts on others’ lives.57 Elsewhere, computation- concerns and the possibility of harm through mali- al systems act as automatic arbiters of power, leav- cious intent.66 Further, taking users’ behaviour as ex- ing decisionmaking to machines, raising questions pressive of true interests and opinions interferes with about legitimacy.58 Consider how algorithmic tools the formation of democratic, private and public judge- are being used in various parts of government ser- ments, potentially undermining people’s agency (see vices, ranging from allocation of social security ben- box 5.1). In some cases AI is as good as or better than efits to criminal justice and security issues.59 Or how humans in hypersuasion. The latest large language algorithms in social media act dynamically, monitor- models passed theory of mind tests that are practiced ing the social relations they mediate in real time, as on humans, even though, in line with the main argu- we just saw. Their capacity to actively shape social ment of this Report, anthropomorphizing framings relations and curate the information accessed grants and language need to be considered with caution.67 AI them far- reaching influence, positioning them not does not suffer from egocentrism biases the way hu- merely as passive facilitators but as active agents in mans do,68 and given that AI has access to much wider both the digital and real worlds.60 sets of language than any human could possibly have, AI is being layered on a changed digital informa- the responses from AI can be particularly persuasive.69 tion environment that was already presenting new Beyond hypersuasion being automated at scale, challenges to collective decisionmaking even before several large language models have exhibited CHAPTER 5 — POWER, INFLUENCE AND CHOICE IN THE ALGORITHMIC A GE 143 sycophancy — the tendency to generate responses messages compared with earlier large language attuned to user tastes over accurate and impartial model releases.75 responses.70 This is observed in large language mod- Moreover, several initiatives seek to address the els trained to provide neutral or diplomatic answers potential harms of AI for collective decisionmaking but also to be responsive to user feedback, so over and action. The United Nations Educational, Scien- time their responses evolve to be more in line with tific and Cultural Organization’s Recommendation user opinions, potentially hampering accuracy and on the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence, adopted in No- reliability.71 vember 2021, provides a global policy framework for Power is also being exercised through algorithmic guiding AI use to uphold human rights and dignity governmentality — the use of algorithms to assess, and ensuring that AI benefits societies at large.76 Up- predict and control the behaviour of populations. dated in 2024, the OECD AI Principles are another The concept stems from Michel Foucault’s govern- set of intergovernmental standards on AI, with 47 ad- mentality, or how power is exercised through knowl- herent countries, providing a basis for developing AI edge (about the subjects being governed) to navigate that respects human rights and democratic values.77 towards certain outcomes through specific instru- Launched in 2019, Singapore’s Model AI Governance ments. Data can be gathered to build detailed profiles Framework is paving the way for a strong AI ecosys- of people, categorize them into groups, predict their tem that balances innovation with concerns around future behaviour, direct them towards certain action security, privacy and accountability, among others.78 or treat subjects differently. Examples include micro- Its objective is to make AI human- centric by provid- targeting populations for votes, predictive policing ing practical guidelines to the private sector to ensure and determining social security benefits for individu- governance and ethics in product development.79 als. The exertion of power in these new ways is simul- taneously complemented by the disempowerment “ The Global Digital Compact, agreed by the of people whose data are being shared, often with- United Nations General Assembly in late 2024, is out their knowledge, leaving them unaware of how it unique and exceedingly important, as elaborated could be used to determine outcomes in their lives.72 further below, for helping different jurisdictions shape the supply of AI according to the universal principles of the United Nations Charter and Can AI be used to enhance collective action? the Universal Declaration of Human Rights While AI risks influencing political processes, it alone These frameworks aim to ensure that AI is pro- may not be the most important determinant of poten- duced in a way that abides by ethical principles that tial impacts. For example, generative AI has reduced support collective action and increase social welfare. the cost of producing false, manipulative content, But they are not universal. In that context the Glob- but the cost of distribution remains the binding con- al Digital Compact,80 agreed by the United Nations straint in having societywide implications.73 In 2024 General Assembly in late 2024, is unique and ex- Wired magazine gathered data from more than 60 ceedingly important, as elaborated further below, countries to understand AI use in manipulating in- for helping different jurisdictions shape the supply of formation prior to elections. Of 78 deepfake cases, AI according to the universal principles of the Unit- half were not intended to deceive; further unpack- ed Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of ing the demand side of false or misleading infor- Human Rights. mation flows is required rather than looking at the Many initiatives are exploring the use of AI to en- supply side alone.74 Concerns that much better large hance collective action.81 For example, deliberative language models would supercharge the persuasive- collective action rests on the understanding that in- ness and scale of political messages appear not to be dividuals are autonomous beings with their own set panning out, since newer and larger models do not of values and beliefs and have capabilities — and more substantially increase the persuasiveness of political critically equal rights — to determine the laws and pol- icies that govern them.82 One key constraint in these 144 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 processes that AI could help tackle is the practical large language model could outperform humans in challenge of mass participation. Citizen assemblies, bringing people together on contentious issues such for example, are difficult to scale and often result in as Brexit, migration, the minimum wage and climate voices being heard unequally. AI- powered tools could change (figure 5.4).88 Group statements compiled synthesize inputs from numerous people to present a using large language models were more acceptable picture of how the population sees issues that affect to the group than those generated by human media- them. An example is Polis,83 a machine learning tool tors. Another experiment demonstrated that AI could that gathers opinions, categorizes them into themes successfully counter beliefs in conspiracy theories by and tries to understand what large groups of people providing alternative facts and engaging in evidence- think.84 One of its innovative features is that it does based dialogues.89 These examples highlight how AI not have a reply button, which mitigates negative could mitigate divides, advancing collective action. back and forth conversations and redirects focus to AI can also help build a healthier ecosystem for on- the expression of novel ideas.85 AI tools are also pro- line conversations. Perspective API, launched in 2017 viding deliberators with useful resources, such as by Jigsaw and Google, facilitates online conversations reliable data and information, to guide collective by flagging malicious content and removing or down- decisionmaking. ranking it.90 More recently, the tool was augmented AI can further enhance the quality of human- to- to prioritize content that moves groups towards con- human interactions by facilitating peaceful, produc- structive dialogue by identifying reasoning, story- tive dialogues. For example, AI- based interventions telling and curiosity in conversations.91 Readers on in online chats can improve political conversations average found that the conversations were not only and do so at scale.86 When people are discussing is- less hostile but also more interesting, trusting and sues that divide them, AI can support mediation by respect-w orthy.92 Publicly available large language generating and refining statements that express com- models, when fine-t uned to give equanimous perspec- mon ground.87 An experiment of a virtual citizens’ as- tives on issues of debate, can expose users to a spec- sembly in the United Kingdom showed that a trained trum of opinions and could nourish public discourse. Figure 5.4 Artificial intelligence (AI) outperforms human mediators in finding common ground Deliberation protocol Statement endorsement Strongly PARTICIPANTS disagree Disagree Somewhat disagree OPINIONS AND CRITIQUES Neutral Somewhat agree Agree AI MEDIATOR Strongly agree 0 10 20 30 Share of statements (%) GROUP STATEMENT Human mediator AI mediator Source: Tessler and others 2024. CHAPTER 5 — POWER, INFLUENCE AND CHOICE IN THE ALGORITHMIC A GE 145 Who has the power? Divides relationships take place. A digital exile exempt from and dependencies are evolving due process. amid furious AI races The freedom to have and exercise more choices over technologies that can powerfully influence peo- From the printing press to the spinning jenny to nu- ple’s opportunities is itself a concern of — and for — clear fission, technological trajectories have long human development. been shaped by people’s choices.93 Algorithms take The opportunity for more choices by and for people this to a new level: they are literally codified choic- seems huge, if bounded in some degree by techno- es about everything from user feeds to online mar- logical feasibility and by the decisions of those sup- ketplaces.94 Economist Martin Shubik, commenting plying AI. As noted above, digital technologies pose on Herbert Simon’s famous lecture on designing or- unique challenges to traditional policy interventions ganizations for an information-r ich world, described to address market concentrations and expand con- human societies as information processing systems.95 sumer choices.97 For example, digital platforms can Human lives are built on decisions made on the basis be understood as essentially selling access to peo- of that information processing. AI- powered algo- ple’s attention to advertisers, but when there are only rithms reflect a fundamental change in how informa- a few players, the concentration of this bottleneck in tion is processed in our societies, how individual and attention is detrimental to advertising firms and con- collective decisions are made and how people live sumer welfare, something that traditionally is not their lives.96 Algorithmic choices do not just dominate considered by competition authorities.98 This new the digital sphere, they constitute it. challenge is perhaps one reason different jurisdic- tions have taken varying views on whether and how “ AI-powered algorithms reflect a fundamental to regulate digital markets and platforms for many change in how information is processed in years and on AI more recently.99 Regulation choic- our societies, how individual and collective es are also shaped not only by the affordances of the decisions are made and how people live new technologies but also by differences in institu- their lives. Algorithmic choices do not just tions and varying interpretations of the state’s role in dominate the digital sphere, they constitute it the economy.100 For example, the United States has emphasized in- The scope, speed and reach of algorithmic choices novation and light regulation of AI, while the Europe- are mindboggling, and they matter for human devel- an Union has prioritized individual protections and opment. Our societies — their laws, norms, institu- potential social harms, establishing comprehensive tions and leaders — codetermine the choices available regulations through laws such as the Digital Markets to us and the ones achievable. That is why under- Act, the Digital Services Act and the General Data standing the ways algorithms mediate our social in- Protection Regulation.101 China follows a state- driven teractions and social choices matter so much. That model.102 is also why it is important to understand the supply While identifying the precise boundary of techno- side of who is making decisions about how those al- logically feasible choices may be hard, an ongoing gorithms work. tension on regulation is clearly driven by the mo- Most of us have little direct say over algorithms. tives of incumbent companies, often concentrated, What choices trickle down to us are a hard residue, as seen above — and by the concerns of people, work- atomizing and binary: buy the latest gadget or not, ers and governments about the negative impacts of accept the cookies or not. Take- it-or- leave-it terms the power concentration documented in this chapter, of service agreements can boil down to, on the one which some years ago resulted in what was described hand, granting Big Tech carte blanche access to our as a “techlash.”103 daily lives in their quest to build bigger and more The concentration of power in those making choic- profitable garrisoned database or, on the other, exclu- es on what kind of AI to supply has consequences sion from colossal digital platforms, where for better for people. Algorithms that maximize user engage- and worse ever more of our lives, interactions and ment are a choice, a lucrative one that may amplify 146 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 outrage. Moderating content (or not) is a choice. So Softbank. The initiative aims to build AI infrastruc- is the degree of openness. Many leading AI firms ture in the United States. The European Union has re- have been reluctant to fully open their AI models, sponded with its own €200 billion partnership with including the underlying training data.104 Compa- InvestAI.110 nies select benchmarks against which their latest In these heady early days of generative AI, coun- models are evaluated. One well- known benchmark tries are staking out positions in light of how they see is apocalyptically dubbed Humanity’s Last Exam it impacting their different interests — from geopol- and pits machines against people.105 If we want hu- itics to security to growth and development. Given mans and machines to compete less and complement the variety of interests in play and the evolving, com- each other more, we should stop letting bullseyes be plex relationships among players, especially between placed on our backs. countries and firms, we should stop talking about an Another manifestation of the restriction of choice AI race and instead talk about many AI races. We is the AI race, an epic spending spree by Big Tech, should also take a step back and question whether whose market capitalizations have ballooned since narratives anchored in zero- sum competition miss ChatGPT burst onto the scene.106 The race is rapidly opportunities for cooperation and gains for all play- evolving, and how it shakes out is anybody’s guess, ers, including across countries. Finding opportunities but a combination of hype and a bigger- is-better par- to steer a mix of cooperation and competition towards adigm appears to be fuelling it.107 human development, towards expanded choices and A simplified AI supply chain hinges on three key opportunities for people, is the task at hand. inputs — computing power (which goes by “compute” in the AI industry jargon) talent and data — in and through which divisions and dependencies among AI models depend on three unevenly distributed companies and countries are evolving. Low- income inputs: Compute, talent and data and many middle- income countries face yawning gaps in each input. Steps can be taken to address Compute gaps, but these countries need to be strategic. The vast majority simply do not have the luxury of spend- About 60–95 percent of recent performance gains in ing billions in a high-s takes AI race. AI have stemmed from scaling compute,111 though it is unclear whether scaling will remain the driving force “ We should also take a step back and question for improved AI performance.112 The training com- whether narratives anchored in zero- sum pute of notable machine learning models has been competition miss opportunities for cooperation increasing by a factor of 4.7 each year since 2010.113 and gains for all players, including across Part of the expense of compute is due to remarka- countries. Finding opportunities to steer a mix ble concentration in the semiconductor market, par- of cooperation and competition towards human ticularly for advanced AI chips, where Nvidia holds a development, towards expanded choices and dominant position.114 The concentration is even more opportunities for people, is the task at hand pronounced in the equipment to make chips, which is effectively controlled by a single company, ASML.115 The relationship between countries is not just The massive fixed costs involved, combined with competitive or confrontational. Governments can low variable costs, favour economies of scale,116 con- be partners, regulators and competitors, some- tributing to a highly concentrated chip market.117 As times simultaneously and in different ways. India major cloud providers develop their own chips, this plans to set up a common compute facility to sup- vertical integration risks concentrating power in new port AI development,108 including among research- ways.118 ers and startups. The United States announced the Apart from the cost of chips themselves, AI data Stargate Initiative,109 a $500 billion partnership be- centres have voracious appetites for energy and wa- tween such recognizable tech titans as Nvidia, Ope- ter.119 Google is turning to small nuclear reactors to nAI and Oracle and Japanese financial conglomerate power AI data centres, and other big corporations are CHAPTER 5 — POWER, INFLUENCE AND CHOICE IN THE ALGORITHMIC A GE 147 reconsidering their climate commitments given AI’s platforms, instant messaging applications and email energy demands.120 services suggests that leveraging nonpublic data could delay a potential data bottleneck by approximately 18 Talent months compared with relying solely on indexed web data.126 Moving from pretraining to posttraining of AI People are the main drivers of innovation and the models, proprietary data have obvious significance for custodians of knowledge. The critical role of people fine- tuning models for specific applications such as driving and disseminating innovation is one reason drug discovery. open- source approaches have gained ground in the One example is Shoshana Zuboff’s point of view, AI industry.121 which sees corporations extract and commodify all The demand for talent is increasing, outstripping kinds of behavioural data, transforming user activity supply that can take time to fill given the bevy of spe- into a competitive resource characterized by a lack of cialized skills required. Even as early as 2021, many user awareness and transparency.127 It is also easy to organizations struggled to fill AI- related roles.122 see how this could extend to governments’ surveil- Meanwhile, industry is siphoning talent from aca- lance capacities, by either using their own databases demia. The proportion of AI Ph.D. graduates entering on people or gaining access to databases maintained industry rose from 21 percent in 2004 to 73 percent by companies. A recent study argued that the emer- in 2022.123 Industry provides not only higher financial gence and persistence of market power around AI incentives but also access to substantial computing would be shaped largely by how data markets operate resources. It often also provides researchers with op- — in particular, whether trading data across firms’ portunities to deploy cutting- edge technologies. Gov- boundaries would take place.128 ernments face similar disadvantages in AI talent. Data Low- income and several middle- income countries face big gaps in key AI inputs The data requirements of AI models can be vast, which affords advantages to some companies and Countries are increasingly being evaluated for their countries over others. Digital platforms and social ability to develop and deploy AI based on how pre- media firms have accumulated massive amounts of pared, ready and vibrant their AI ecosystems are. proprietary data over the years, due largely to positive Multiple global indices and tools now compare na- network effects, which amplify the value of a prod- tional AI capabilities, though their scope and meth- uct or service as more people use it.124 While network odology differ widely. Insights from these indices effects are less clear with AI, data feedback loops, in highlight gaps across low- and several middle- income which AI gets better and more attractive to users as countries along various dimensions (table 5.2). their interactions with it deliver more data, can also Several factors determine a country’s ability to de- play a role.125 velop AI. Examining a country’s science–technology Large proprietary databases are set to take on greater nexus129 — the interconnected and reciprocal relation- importance as the current crop of large language mod- ship between scientific research and technological els exhaust the supply of publicly available data and progress — is one way to assess this ability. The nexus as public datasets increasingly contain AI- generated depends on a country’s pre- existing technological output, though this depends on the evolution of al- capabilities, the strength of its scientific knowledge gorithms. For example, reinforcement learning train- base and the alignment between the scientific and ing methods may put a premium on domain- specific technological sectors.130 and high- quality data or even synthetic data that are High- income countries such as the United States, model generated (while not a perfect analogy, think the Republic of Korea, Japan and Germany, in that of the way AlphaGoZero and AlphaZero were trained order, have well- established digital infrastructures, to play, respectively, Go and chess). A recent analysis giving them a major advantage in AI development. of the private data available on major closed content In contrast, low- income countries may lack the 148 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Table 5.2 Gaps across country income groups based on popular artificial intelligence (AI) metrics Global AI Vibrancy Tool Government AI Readiness Index AI Preparedness Index Global AI Index Highlights gaps in AI activity, High- income countries Wealthier economies China and the United States development and impact traditionally lead due to mature (advanced and some dominate across investment, across countries. tech sectors. emerging markets) are better innovation and implementation. prepared for AI adoption. Among 36 evaluated 2024 data show low- and middle- The next eight countries are closer countries, only India (ranked income countries improving in Considerable variation exists, in rank, with India as the only low- 4th) is lower middle income governance, ethics and data with low- income countries or middle- income country in the — showing low AI vibrancy in strategies — potentially closing lagging. top 10. The remaining 73 countries lower- income countries. gaps. trail behind. Source: AIPI 2025; Oxford Insights 2023; Stanford Institute for Human- Centered AI 2025; Tortoise Media 2025. digital infrastructure to even deploy, let alone sup- for complex AI tasks.136 Big Tech dominates global AI ply, AI tools. The United States, China, the United computing power, owning much more than many na- Kingdom, Germany and Canada also lead in scientif- tional governments.137 ic knowledge production, with the United States and The availability of data for AI development in a China holding a distinct advantage.131 country depends on several factors, which can be as- One of the three pillars of the Government AI sessed through the Data Availability dimension of the Readiness Index is the Technology Sector,132 which AI Readiness Index’s Data & Infrastructure pillar.138 assesses the maturity of a country’s technological in- Data availability varies considerably across countries frastructure . This pillar also reflects the disparities in and regions. Middle- income countries are improving ability to develop AI across countries, similar to those their data ecosystems through stronger policies and in the science–technology nexus. When focusing governance. However, many struggle with data rep- solely on the Technology Sector pillar, high- income resentativeness due to gaps in internet access. Sub- countries generally outperform others, with the Unit- Saharan Africa is making progress in data availability ed States standing out due to its mature market and and infrastructure but still shows large gaps. These high innovation capacity. Other high- income regions, disparities stem from differences in government such as Western Europe, also perform well but typ- commitment to open data, data management capa- ically lag behind the United States in this area. In bilities and access to technology. contrast, low- and middle- income countries in Sub- There is a stark divide in AI talent between low- Saharan Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean and middle- income countries on the one hand and exhibit substantial gaps. high- income economies on the other.139 The Unit- Most large-s cale AI models today are developed by ed States attracts 60 percent of elite AI research- organizations based in the United States, followed by ers (roughly the top 2 percent) and hosts 75 percent China and the United Kingdom.133 Only a small frac- of top- tier talent educated in US or Chinese insti- tion originates from other countries, including Saudi tutions. While China now retains 47 percent of its Arabia and the United Arab Emirates, and very few homegrown researchers — up from 29 percent in 2019 are created through international collaborations (fig- — most lower income countries struggle to retain tal- ure 5.5). Investment is also concentrated in the Unit- ent. India has also made progress in retaining talent: ed States and China (figure 5.6). 20 percent of its AI researchers now stay domestical- ly (up from near zero in 2019).140 Gaps in AI capabilities High- income countries such as the Republic of Korea, the United Kingdom and the United States As of March 2024, the United States hosted about leverage existing infrastructure and funding to at- half the global data centres,134 reflecting the concen- tract talent, while emerging economies face an tration of that infrastructure.135 Although cloud com- uphill battle. This entrenches a cycle where inno- puting relaxes the link between the physical locations vation clusters in wealthy countries, risking leaving of data centres and data use, only 5 percent of Afri- others further behind in AI innovation, supply and ca’s AI talent has access to the computational power deployment. CHAPTER 5 — POWER, INFLUENCE AND CHOICE IN THE ALGORITHMIC A GE 149 Figure 5.5 The majority of today’s large- scale artificial intelligence models are developed by organizations based in the United States, followed by China and the United Kingdom C umulative number of models 200 180 160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 United States China United Kingdom Saudi Arabia Other Multinational Source: Epoch AI 2024d. Figure 5.6 Most global investment in artificial intelligence (AI) flowed to the United States in 2024 Notable global AI investment flows ($ billions) 80 70.2 70 60 50 40 30 19.9 20 10 6.5 0.7 0 United States China Middle East Rest of the world Source: Lucidity Insights 2024. These disparities are also revealed by a widening highest self-r eported AI skill prevalence globally (fig- chasm in AI talent distribution between 2019 and ure 5.8), but even as lower income countries cultivate 2023.141 In 2023 high- income countries saw a net gain talent pools, systematic gaps in compute, data and in- in AI talent, while low- and middle- income coun- stitutional support drive net losses, as skilled workers tries experienced a net loss (figure 5.7). India has the migrate to higher income countries. 150 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure 5.7 Artificial intelligence (AI) talent has been flowing towards high- income countries 4.0 3.5 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 –0.5 –1.0 CHAPTER 5 — POWER, INFLUENCE AND CHOICE IN THE ALGORITHMIC A GE 151 ainauhtiL aisenodnI Net AI skills migration, 2023 (per 10,000 LinkedIn members) gruobmexuL dnalreztiwS setarimE barA detinU surpyC ynamreG airtsuA adanaC dnalniF ainotsE sdnalrehteN ailartsuA dnalerI napaJ eropagniS aibarA iduaS dnalecI kramneD modgniK detinU yawroN setatS detinU dnaloP muigleB niapS lagutroP dnalaeZ weN nedewS )RAS( anihC ,gnoK gnoH aivtaL aihcezC ecnarF aciR atsoC ainamoR lizarB aitaorC ocixeM elihC ainevolS acirfA htuoS anitnegrA yaugurU ylatI aeroK fo cilbupeR yragnuH eceerG eyikrüT learsI aidnI Note: The figure shows net migration flows (of LinkedIn members with AI skills) in 2023. The bars indicate the magnitude of a country’s net AI talent gains (or losses), normalized by the total LinkedIn membership in that country (and multiplied by 10,000). Source: OECD 2025a. Figure 5.8 India has the highest self-r eported artificial intelligence (AI) skills penetration Cross-country AI skills penetration 3.0 2.5 2.0 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 aidnI setatS detinU ynamreG adanaC modgniK detinU learsI eropagniS ecnarF napaJ eyikrüT aeroK fo cilbupeR niapS lizarB sdnalrehteN eceerG ylatI dnalreztiwS egareva labolG ailartsuA setarimE barA detinU aisenodnI nedewS dnaloP )RAS( anihC ,gnoK gnoH dnalerI kramneD lagutroP airtsuA anitnegrA ocixeM aibarA iduaS dnalniF muigleB surpyC ainamoR aihcezC yragnuH acirfA htuoS yawroN ainotsE elihC ainauhtiL aitaorC dnalaeZ weN gruobmexuL yaugurU aciR atsoC ainevolS aivtaL dnalecI Note: The figure shows the prevalence of workers with AI skills (as self-reported by LinkedIn members) by country and against a global average benchmark (as shown by the red bar). A relative penetration rate of 2 means that the average penetration of AI skills in the country is twice the global average across the same set of occupations. Source: OECD 2025a. A geopolitical innovation race is taking shape Big Tech is also part of the agents involved, given that it operates transnationally, extending its reach The AI races142 can be interpreted as unfolding along and influence. a spectrum, from a collaborative innovation race to a Their operations involve moving data and services purely zero- sum arms race (figure 5.9).143 This spec- across international borders, making them important trum reflects different ways of considering ongoing players in various regions. The transnational opera- AI competitive dynamics.144 The nature of the race is tions of Big Tech are fraught with tensions and chal- not inherent to AI itself but emerges from how agents lenges due to the diverse regulatory landscapes, as interpret and respond to the actions and perceived in- companies must comply with varying requirements terests of others. in different regions. This is apparent in the way app The perception of a race itself can become self- stores control software on devices and in the way fulfilling, where agents, believing they are in zero-s um data labelling in some countries affects labour condi- competition, prioritize speed and achieving break- tions in others.148 For instance, the EU General Data throughs over safety and ethical considerations.145 Mo- Protection Regulation sets stringent data protection tivations are not solely about security; they are also standards that non- European companies must ad- heavily influenced by economic and status concerns,146 here to if they wish to operate in Europe,149 demon- with countries vying for technological, economic and strating the European Union’s ability to influence political leadership. This mix of motivations is entan- global data practices. This is an example of the “Brus- gled with security concerns, as countries aim to defend sels Effect,”150 wherein EU regulations can become their territory and enhance their international compet- de facto international standards, as companies adopt itiveness and reputation. The interactions are charac- them to reduce costs across jurisdictions.151 terized by a mix of competition and collaboration, in These differences put in sharp relief the im- complex and shifting networks.147 portance of the UN Global Digital Compact. Figure 5.9 The artificial intelligence (AI) race today can be conceptualized as unfolding along a spectrum spanning innovation to arms Innovation Geopolitical Arms race race innovation race Innovation race Geopolitical innovation race Arms race The innovation race involves multiple actors The geopolitical innovation race is a hybrid The arms race is characterized by intense, — including companies, states and research concept that combines elements of the innovation zero- sum competition, primarily among institutions — competing for technological race and the arms race. It involves competition for states, focused on military capabilities, with leadership with more collaborative networks technological leadership but also features a mix tightly coupled national networks. and looser relationships between actors. of competition and collaboration within national This race is driven by security concerns, borders, or technopoles. This race is motivated by a mix of economic where states seek to gain relative and status gains, viewing AI as a key This race is characterized by economic and status advantages and often treat technologies technology for broad socioeconomic concerns intertwined with security and power such as AI as a weapon or part of a weapon advancement. interests, with AI viewed as a key technology system. In this race there is continuous for national security and power with limited competition and investment, with actors This race is generally collaborative and interpretative openness. envisioning (relative) advantages and seeing competitive, with actors striving for no scenario of possible collaboration. innovation and the expected payoffs of It is a race in which state actors play a crucial a technological breakthrough shaping role in funding and regulating technological This race is criticized for potentially inducing incentives. development. It can have both positive and researchers to prioritize speed over safety negative outcomes. and ethics. Source: Schmid and others 2025. 152 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Implementing provisions such as a continuous di- together to spur innovation and deliver better out- alogue across jurisdictions on how to approach AI comes for everyone. regulation — a dialogue informed by science and in Low- and many middle- income countries will need which countries not at the forefront of AI supply have support to get started on their own AI supply journey. a chance to engage will be crucial. Uncertainties Opportunities for cooperation exist, as in pooling around the future of AI as a technology and sharp access to AI- related infrastructure, sharing exper- differences across jurisdictions may not make a uni- tise and, where possible, developing common policy versal set of regulations feasible, but everyone, firms positions — that can ease entry and distribution of de- included, stands to benefit from implementing these sired technologies while bolstering negotiating posi- and other provisions of the Global Digital Compact tions. AI also presents opportunities for Indigenous (box 5.2). peoples by offering tools for language preservation, but there are concerns about data ownership, misrep- resentation and the need for Indigenous participation What are the possibilities for international action on AI? in AI development to ensure cultural integrity and sovereignty (box 5.3). Whether one race among AI developers or many AI National policies on AI, nascent and evolving, will races among an evolving complex of countries and need to be flexible as the technology and its appli- tech companies, a zero- sum mindset seems to per- cations continue apace. Different countries have so vade AI efforts. It is leaving many countries and peo- far staked out positions that overlap in some ways ple behind. It misses opportunities for international and differ in others. Coverage of important regula- cooperation that could promote and more equitably tory domains is uneven within and across leading distribute shared benefits on the one hand and better AI countries.152 Varying national approaches can act manage shared risks on the other. Competition and as laboratories for experimentation and innova- cooperation can not only coexist; they can also work tion. Striking the right balance is key, as regulatory Box 5.2 The UN Global Digital Compact for addressing power imbalances and fostering inclusive artificial intelligence “A world of AI haves and have- nots would be a world of perpetual instability. We must never allow AI to stand for ‘advancing inequality.’ Only by preventing the emergence of fragmented AI spheres can we build a world where technology serves all humanity.” — UN Secretary- General António Guterres Signed by 193 countries at the Future Summit in September 2024, the UN Global Digital Compact brings together countries to strategize ways to make artificial intelligence (AI) safe, open and inclusive. It is anchored in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, with the goal of ensuring that the benefits of AI are equitably distributed and do not leave behind developing countries, especially the least developed countries. It is further guided by the principles of international human rights to ensure that all human rights— including civil, political, economic, social and cultural rights — are respected and safeguarded online and offline. The compact articulates several key objectives that can help address power imbalances and ensure equitable ac- cess and opportunities. This includes closing the digital divide for all and helping advance the Sustainable Develop- ment Goals from education and health to inequality and governance. Those tasks are central in this effort to ensuring that no one is left behind, including youth and women innovators, as well as small and medium enterprise owners, who can meaningfully contribute to AI development. International AI governance, a joint responsibility of all countries, is a key part of the compact. The aim is to govern AI in the public interest while ensuring that its applications promote diverse cultures and languages rather than increase biases. The compact recognizes the critical contribution of governments, civil society, the private sector and other key partners in its successful implementation. Source: UN Global Digital Compact. CHAPTER 5 — POWER, INFLUENCE AND CHOICE IN THE ALGORITHMIC A GE 153 Box 5.3 More subtle manifestations of power emerge in artificial intelligence models’ behaviour Generative artificial intelligence (AI) systems are trained using around 90 percent English materials.1 While one cannot directly tie training data to AI outputs, there is evidence that the predominance of English in training data matters.2 In some large language models this is explicitly true, as non- English prompts are translated into and from English. In multilingual models (in which English is not explicitly used as a “pivot” language), AI appears to conceptualize words in ways that do not represent a specific language but align more closely with their English definitions.3 One study found that when multilingual models are prompted to make emotional statements, they respond with the expected emotion of someone from the United States.4 AI models also reflect other biases,5 though not always in the same way.6 Some evidence shows that biases demonstrated in English texts are reproduced in other languages.7 Still, other studies are less definitive, showing that ChatGPT is more effective at accurately assessing a culture’s value in its native language than in English.8 Large language models trained almost exclusively on English materials can pose risks for cultural misrepresentation and even exploitation. Incorporating Indigenous languages into mainstream generative AI platforms, such as OpenAI’s ChatGPT and Whisper, raises concerns over ownership of data produced by or about Indigenous peoples.9 Technol- ogy companies often use data without the consent, consultation or compensation of Indigenous peoples,10 mirroring other extractivist practices.11 In accordance with the 2020 Los Pinos Declaration, which states “Nothing for us without us,”12 Indigenous peoples’ participation in new technology development is essential for enhancing their agency. Despite the risks, AI systems developed and codeveloped by Indigenous peoples can be valuable tools for preserv- ing cultures and languages. With half the world’s roughly 7,000 languages predicted to be seriously endangered or extinct by 2100,13 AI can be a valuable tool for language documentation and education. Te Hiku Media, a New Zealand Indigenous nongovernmental organization dedicated to Māori language revitalization, has developed an app to allow users to upload audio in Māori,14 which will train AI models used in chatbots and language learning apps.15 Such AI tools enable Māori speakers to access information that previously required foreign language knowledge. Importantly, this case demonstrates that such tools can be developed with processes that respect Indigenous peoples’ data. Notes 1. Achiam and others 2023; Cao and others 2023; Touvron and others 2023. 2. Piir 2023. 3. Caliskan, Bryson and Narayanan 2017; Wendler and others 2024. 4. Havaldar and others 2023. 5. Abid, Farooqi and Zou 2021; Caliskan, Bryson and Narayanan 2017; Kaplan and others 2024; Lippens 2024; Nadeem, Bethke and Reddy 2020; Salinas, Haim and Nyarko 2024. 6. Huang and Xiong 2023; Mexico 2020. 7. Haval- dar and others 2023. 8. Cao and others 2023. 9. Chandran 2023; Kirkby-M cLeod 2023. 10. Te Hiku Media 2025. 11. Pinhanez and others 2023. 12. Mexico 2020. 13. Llanes- Ortiz 2023. 14. Korero Maori 2025; Te Hiku Media 2025. 15. ITU 2022. differences carry the risk of incoherence that can sty- oversight, content provenance, model evaluations mie innovation, obstruct technological diffusion and (of which benchmarking, discussed in chapter 4, ignite races to the bottom. is part), incident monitoring and risk management Regulatory differences can be an opportunity for protocols (table 5.3). 154 Consider the potential for international cooperation or coordination.153 Inter- AI audits to ensure that AI development adheres national cooperation is even more important for to social, cultural and ethical norms and broadly countries with limited ability to influence technolo- to the principles of human development (box 5.4). gy companies’ conduct within their own borders. The The benefits are lower or mixed for data privacy, rationale for international collective action is clear at data provenance, chip distribution and bias mitiga- an intuitive level (digital technologies and their im- tion, as seen from a granular assessment, accord- pacts spill across borders, as do their multinational ing to four rationales for international cooperation: suppliers). But where and how (for instance, cooper- cross- border externalities, regulatory arbitrage, ation or coordination) need to be specified with more uneven governance and interoperability (see table precision. 5.3). Other governance research has highlighted in- One recent analysis examined nine policy ternational cooperation opportunities in two broad areas across data, compute and model govern- categories: science and technology research, devel- ance. It concluded that international coordination opment and diffusion, and international rulemak- would yield strong benefits in computer- provided ing and enforcement.155 154 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Table 5.3 Where there is a stronger case for international policy coordination on artificial intelligence Cross- border Regulatory Uneven Category Subcategory externalities arbitrage governance Interoperability Overall Data governance Data privacy Mixed Low Low Low Low Data provenance High High Low Mixed Mixed Compute governance Chip distribution Mixed Mixed High Low Mixed Compute provider oversight High High High High High Model governance Bias mitigation Low Low Mixed Low Low Content provenance Mixed Mixed High High High Model evaluations High High Mixed High High Incident monitoring High Mixed High High High Risk management protocols High High High Mixed High Source: Dennis 2024. Box 5.4 The potential for artificial intelligence audit protocols International Panel on the Information Environment, Scientific Panel on Global Standards for AI Audits As artificial intelligence (AI) systems become increasingly ubiquitous across all sectors of society, the need for robust auditing and oversight mechanisms has become more pressing. Audits offer a way to assess whether the development, deployment and operations of an AI system align with acceptable technical performance, as well as social, cultural and ethical norms and values. Audits can be a critical tool for ensuring that these powerful systems are aligned with the principles of human development — promoting individual freedoms, expanding choices and enhancing the dignity and worth of all people. By rigorously evaluating the development, deployment, manage- ment and operations of AI systems, audits can help uncover whether a system engenders individual and collective harms that could undermine core human development objectives. They can help ensure that technical innovation does not pose undue risks to human life or people, guaranteeing that the benefits of AI are equitably distributed and that its risks are mitigated. At the individual level audits can ensure that AI does not violate fundamental rights and freedoms. Audits assess these systems for fairness, transparency and accountability, protecting individuals from discrimination, exploitation and infringement on their human rights. Moreover, AI audits can illuminate the broader societal impacts of these technologies, shedding light on how they may inadvertently exacerbate existing discrimination or create new forms of marginalization. By examining the data provenance and supply chains that feed into AI systems, auditors can uncover data colonialism, labour exploitation and environmental degradation — all of which have profound implications for human development. The International Panel on the Information Environment’s Scientific Panel on Global Standards for AI Audits has published two reports to inform policymakers as they develop standards for AI auditing. The first covers existing audit practices and highlights the strengths and weaknesses of different systems currently in operation around the world.1 The second outlines what a global audit protocol might look like.2 It gives detailed recommendations for creating a protocol around the auditor, audit object, criteria and evidence, methodology and postaudit activities. By fostering transparency, accountability and stakeholder engagement, audits can shape AI development in ways that empower individuals, strengthen communities and advance the broader human development agenda. Notes 1. IPIE 2024a. 2. IPIE 2025. We are not starting from scratch. International AI Seven (G7), the International Organization for Stand- initiatives have sprung up — for example, under the ardization, the International Telecommunication auspices of the Global Partnership on AI, the Group of Union, the Organisation for Economic Co-o peration CHAPTER 5 — POWER, INFLUENCE AND CHOICE IN THE ALGORITHMIC A GE 155 and Development (OECD) and the United Nations certainly for several specific and important areas. — covering the gamut of data, compute and model In some of them, initiatives are already under way governance.156 using existing international fora, processes and in- Some have suggested that centralized models stitutions. New arrangements for AI may be needed, of governance may not be best suited for a rapidly drawing inspiration and lessons from international evolving technology like AI. Instead, they propose cooperation — for example, in global health and cli- that a distributed network of networks can address mate change. We may even need to go beyond cen- the challenges and opportunities of AI governance tralized arrangements of the past to more distributed more effectively than a centralized system.157 This ap- and networked architectures that provide flexibility proach, modelled on the internet, involves a distrib- in the face of AI’s rapid headline- grabbing advanc- uted network of governments, industry, civil society es. Trust, flexibility, trial- and-error — all will be key and academia addressing AI governance complex- in carving out an essential and valuable space for co- ities. The G7 exemplifies this approach, serving as a operation amid a flurry of AI races to generate shared central node in broader governance efforts. Japan’s sets of standards and safeguards for healthy competi- “networked AI” study inspired the OECD’s AI ethics tion to steer innovation towards human development recommendations, endorsed by 44 countries.158 The and to ensure that everyone has a shot at participat- Global Partnership on AI evolved into an OECD part- ing fruitfully in this new AI era. nership, reinforcing collaborative governance. The AI regulation may place new, unique demands on Hiroshima AI Process led to a code of conduct and a the institutions and agreements underpinning inter- corporate adherence monitoring function. national cooperation. Existing institutions and pro- In sum, opportunities for international coopera- cesses are a good foundation to build on, anchored in tion on AI exist, not necessarily for everything, but the Global Digital Compact. 156 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 SPOTLIGHT 5.1 Threats to democratic reason in a high-choice information environment Åsa Wikforss, Professor of Theoretical Philosophy, Stockholm University Democracy faces unique epistemic challenges in have these epistemic strengths due to the ability to today’s digitalized information environment, re- harness collective intelligence through two essential lating specifically to the capacity to make ration- mechanisms: majority rule and deliberation. Major- al, knowledge- based decisions. Democracies have ity rule enables democracies to harness the wisdom unique epistemic strengths that allow them to solve of crowds, and deliberative democracy facilitates complex problems and build better societies.1 Dem- public reasoning through respectful, open dialogues ocratic governance exhibits a form of collective to reach consensus. For instance, in a representative intelligence, a “democratic reason,” that is not ex- democracy, while parliament plays a central role as hibited by nondemocratic modes of governance. a deliberative forum, an open and fair public debate While there is great diversity among the world’s is also essential, both when it comes to providing democracies, including low- or high- functioning knowledge- based decisions and for securing the le- electoral and liberal democracies, a distinctive trait gitimacy of these decisions.5 in all of them is that they exhibit certain epistemic The main critic of the epistemic argument for de- strengths.2 mocracy is that it relies on assumptions that may The digital information environment poses a set not be true. For example, the assumption that vot- of distinct threats to democratic reason. In a world ers have knowledge about politically relevant facts, facing a set of interconnected crises, epistemi- such as climate change, existing policies or con- cally well- functioning democracies can support sequences of prior political decisions6. Naturally, knowledge- based and rational policymaking. More- voting behaviour is a reflection not simply of the over, the weakening of democratic reason poses a factual beliefs that voters hold but also of their val- danger to democracy itself. ues. Nevertheless, voters’ factual beliefs are a key psychological factor underlying their behaviour, and if voters are ignorant or mistaken in these fac- The value of democracy tual beliefs, it will have consequences for how well democracy works. To what extent does the infor- Democracy has not only an important procedur- mation environment pose a threat to the epistem- al value but also an important substantive value, ic strengths of democracy? How does this affect relating to the actual outcomes of democrat- the capacity of democracies to address key global ic decisionmaking.3 Empirical studies show that challenges? democracies tend to produce outcomes that are generally considered good: they tend to avoid ca- lamities (such as famines and wars), enhance A high- choice information environment human wellbeing along several dimensions (for instance health, life expectancy, equality and hap- Scholars describe the changed information envi- piness), provide better protections for the environ- ronment as a transformation from a low- choice ment and are better at dealing with crises (such as to a high- choice information environment. This a pandemic).4 has consequences for the use of and trust in The epistemic argument for democracy is that media. People’s individual motivations and abilities democratic decisionmaking is uniquely equipped become key determinants in what information they to be rational and knowledge based. Democracies consume,7 further increasing the risk of biases. The CHAPTER 5 — POWER, INFLUENCE AND CHOICE IN THE ALGORITHMIC A GE 157 demand for information that merely confirms (rath- Harms to democratic reason er than informs) people’s views affects their trust and use of established news media. The design of The transformation of the information environment social media platforms, where algorithms promote has consequences for central mechanisms under- content that captures people’s attention, potential- lying the epistemic potential of democracy: aggrega- ly compounds this challenge. The complex interac- tion and deliberation. In a high- choice information tion between empirical beliefs and attitudes of trust environment, with large amounts of unreliable in- can exacerbate polarization of media trust, often formation and where biases and background beliefs along political fault lines. Polarized trust in turn determine both the assessment of new information causes factual belief polarization, where political and the choice of who to trust, there is a very real risk opponents hold opposing beliefs on empirical facts. that large groups of individuals will do worse than Research shows that factual belief polarization can chance. If the evidence presented to a population is occur simply as a result of selective sharing patterns systematically misleading, the majority of people will in digital ecosystems.8 Similar polarization effects be systematically misled. If so, a central condition for can be seen when it comes to trust in science.9 Par- Condorcet’s jury theorem will not be met. Moreover, tisanship therefore both drives media trust and is systematic disinformation in combination with sys- driven by media use, leading to an increasingly par- tematic biases, reinforced by increased partisanship, tisan media landscape. means that errors will not be random and may not It should be stressed that misinformation and cancel out.14 disinformation not only lead people to hold false The high- choice information environment also beliefs about the world but also undermine our ca- poses risks to the deliberative dimension of de- pacity to critically assess further information that mocracy. Policy disagreements always have two we receive. Evaluation of the plausibility of a piece potential sources: disagreement on values and dis- of information is always carried out against the agreement on the facts. People may disagree on a background of our prior beliefs. If these beliefs, in given climate policy because they disagree on the turn, are the result of unreliable sources, the re- value of mitigating climate change, in particular sulting assessments will be equally unreliable. For when such mitigation conflicts with other things instance, for someone who has been fed disinfor- they value (such as lower gas prices). But they may mation about climate change, additional disinfor- also disagree on the underlying climate science. mation will seem plausible. Indeed, given a person’s A central function of democratic deliberation is acquired, false background beliefs, it may even be to assess the arguments on either side, relating to rational (from the subject’s point of view) to reject both facts and values, exposing poor reasoning and the testimony provided by expert consensus on an- weeding out falsehoods. Under ideal circumstances thropogenic climate change.10 the end result is some form of consensus. But even The role of prior beliefs in assessing information when consensus is not achieved, deliberation al- highlights the fact that efforts to counteract disinfor- lows for a peaceful management of disagreement, mation and misinformation at the individual level, helping people understand different points of view such as debunking, while important, have limita- and paving the way for political compromise. The tions.11 In a polluted information landscape people’s idea that well- structured deliberation can be effec- critical thinking capacities may be compromised.12 tive is borne out by the application of deliberative Efforts to strengthen these critical thinking skills mini- publics across the world, where a representa- will have to be combined with initiatives to improve tive assembly of citizens deliberates on topics rele- the quality of the information environment— for in- vant to policymaking.15 Examples include citizens’ stance, by having social media platforms amplify re- assemblies both at the local level (involving delib- liable information, making it easier for people to fact erations about local budget decisions, for example) check and track truth. In a recent survey a majority of and at the national and transnational levels, where experts stressed the importance of supporting free topics such as climate policy, constitutional reform and independent media.13 and a variety of social issues have been discussed. 158 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Mini- publics are designed to increase public par- is assessed based on its congeniality to the position ticipation and have been shown to counteract be- associated with our particular political or cultural lief polarization and strengthen knowledge- based affiliations.20 Thus, evidence against the belief held decisionmaking. Similar results can be seen from by the group is undermined. experimental work on deliberative polling, which Knowledge resistance interacts with the high- involves examining how people’s political views are choice information environment in complex affected by group deliberations where trained mod- ways. Rationalizing a cherished belief in the face erators and dialogue with experts are included.16 of counter evidence often involves trying to find In the new information environment, however, reasons not to trust the relevant source of the ev- reaching consensus through public deliberation is idence. For instance, when there is (near) expert increasingly difficult, considering that a distinc- consensus, as in the case of anthropogenic cli- tive feature of the current era is increasing disa- mate change, resisting the expert testimony typi- greement on facts and the interpretation of data.17 cally involves adopting a conspiracy theory.21 The When deliberation is based on false and mislead- availability of conspiracy theories in the digital in- ing information, the “reasons” provided will not be formation environment thus serves to strengthen truth- conducive, and the possibility of reaching a the type of motivated reasoning involved in science knowledge- based consensus is compromised. This denialism. also harms the epistemic function of deliberation, when it is weaponized to generate epistemic cyni- cism, causing people to devalue contributions from Conclusion reliable sources.18 Relatedly, politically polarized trust in media and science poses a serious obstacle In sum, the new high- choice information envi- to finding a common ground of empirical facts. And ronment, engendered by the digitalization of in- increasing, unbridgeable factual disagreements, in formation, poses a serious threat to the epistemic turn, will cause increasing, unbridgeable political strengths of democracy. First, it undermines the disagreements. conditions required for truth to emerge from the This is related to concerns about knowledge re- aggregation of opinions. Second, it weakens dem- sistance, the tendency to resist available knowl- ocratic deliberation and the possibility of resolving edge. Knowledge resistance involves a form of disagreements by appealing to evidence and ra- response to available evidence, where belief for- tional arguments. With the emergence of genera- mation is driven by desires rather than by the evi- tive artificial intelligence tools, systems capable of dence.19 Thus, in the case of tribal thinking, there is creating texts, images and videos with astonishing the desire to hold on to beliefs that have become a speed and facility, scholars worry that the quality mark of identity of the group — for instance, beliefs of the information environment could deteriorate about vaccines or about genetically modified organ- further.22 isms. In such a situation, the fear of being exclud- Much work is currently being done to understand ed from the group causes people to resist available and address these epistemic threats to democra- evidence that the belief held is false. A prominent cy, but there are many barriers to such research.23 psychological mechanism driving knowledge re- A central problem, among others, is poor access sistance is motivated reasoning, the tendency of to data; legislation demanding greater transparen- individuals to unconsciously conform assessment cy on the part of technology platforms is essential, of factual information to some goal collateral to as- such as the EU Digital Services Act. Upholding ac- sessing its truth. In the case of politically motivat- ademic freedom for information scholars is key for ed reasoning, involved in tribal thinking, evidence the future of the research field. CHAPTER 5 — POWER, INFLUENCE AND CHOICE IN THE ALGORITHMIC A GE 159 NOTES 1 See especially Goodin and Spiekermann (2018) and Landemore (2012). 12 Wikforss, Kendeou and Robinson 2019. 2 See the classification employed by the V- Dem Institute, where five high- 13 IPIE 2024b. level principles of democracy are distinguished: electoral, liberal, partici- 14 Goodin and Spiekermann 2018. patory, deliberative and egalitarian (V-D em Institute 2025). 15 See, for instance, Escobar and Elstub (2017), Participedia (2025) and Smith 3 For a clear articulation of this reasoning, see Landemore (2012). (2009). 4 Lundstedt and others 2022. 16 See Stanford Deliberative Democracy Lab, where more than 150 delibera- 5 See, for instance, Habermas (1984) and Landemore (2012). tive polling experiments have been run in more than 50 countries. 6 Brennan 2016. 17 Rich 2018. 7 Aelst 2017; Strömbäck and others 2022. 18 McKay and Tenove 2021. 8 Bowen, Dmitriev and Galperti 2023. 19 Glüer and Wikforss 2022. 9 For a discussion of polarization and trust in science, see Rekker (2021). 20 Kahan 2015. 10 Glüer and Wikforss 2022; Levy 2021. 21 Lewandowsky, Gignac and Oberauer 2013. 11 For a useful guide to interventions against misinformation on the indi- 22 IPIE 2024b. vidual level, see Kozyreva and others (2024). 23 IPIE 2024b. 160 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 CHAPTER 6 Reimagining choices: Towards artificial intelligence– augmented human development 161 CHAPTER 6 Reimagining choices: Towards artificial intelligence– augmented human development Seizing the opportunities of AI demands more than technological innovation. Bridging micro- and macro- level evidence, this chapter proposes an actionable framework for artificial intelligence (AI)–augmented human development that is robust to fast-paced technological change. It outlines three directions for action: building a complementarity economy, driving innovation with intent and investing in capabilities that count. Together, these directions aim to inspire context-specific choices so that countries can harness AI to expand opportunities, enhance people’s capabilities and deliver improvements in people’s lives. 162 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Scientific and technological progress propel devel- people do—automating work but resulting in job opment1 while changing patterns of economic op- losses without delivering broader productivity portunity and redrawing inequalities.2 As artificial gains.7 Instead, AI designed to augment human intelligence (AI) moves from a niche technology to work can enhance productivity, support economic a cornerstone of people’s lives across multiple do- diversification and speed up technological pro- mains, how can we seize its potential to advance gress.8 AI’s potential to create positive spillovers human development?3 across economies depends on networks compris- The answer depends on more than just algorithms. ing humans and AI—AI alone will not realize that We cannot code away complex social problems or de- potential because its adaptation to unique and ploy AI based on wishful and simplistic approaches.4 varied contexts often requires human steering and New fault lines may have less to do with the dichoto- evaluation (chapter 1). Where access to advanced my between humans and AI and more to do with the expertise is limited, AI-powered tools can bridge difference between humans capable of leveraging gaps and enable workers to perform higher-value AI versus humans without those capabilities. Rather tasks.9 This may enhance economic opportunities, than trying to predict where those fault lines lie, this including for those historically left behind.10 chapter explores choices to shape our future with AI Because AI runs on existing physical infrastruc- to advance human development. ture, the transition to a complementarity economy The chapter bridges micro- and macro-level evi- may not require extensive new physical invest- dence and analysis to put forward a framework for ment, as long as electricity and internet access (in- AI-augmented human development. Detailed poli- cluding over time broadband and cloud computing cies and interventions need to attend to both the con- services) is ensured (chapter 1, spotlight 6.2). text in which AI is deployed and its affordances,5 so • Driving innovation with intent. Choices should the chapter outlines three strategic directions to in- be geared to harness AI’s potential to accelerate form more detailed actions: building a complemen- science and technological innovation, not by auto- tarity economy, driving innovation with intent and mating creative processes but by augmenting them, investing in capabilities that count. These three direc- building on the distinct complementarity between tions aim to inspire choices for AI-augmented human humans and AI.11 This includes leveraging AI to development that unleash a virtuous cycle between expand what people can do as we continue to seek AI innovation and deployment and outcomes that im- to fulfil those fundamental human aspirations to prove people’s lives. understand and create, reflected in activities rang- • Building a complementarity economy. Choices that ing from basic science to the arts. Thus, AI should build a complementarity economy include those that not be measured solely by its potential to replicate make AI pro-worker through institutions and policies what humans can do to improve automation but that empower workers to use AI to augment what also by its ability to enhance human capabilities. they do while limiting AI curbs on worker agency. That should inspire research and technological ef- Those institutions structure incentives and regula- forts that drive the evolution of AI itself.12 Adjusting tions that foster the complementarity between labour economic incentives and expanding AI bench- and AI.6 Doing so implies recognizing AI’s compara- marks beyond performance and safety to include tive advantages over earlier digital technologies—its how AI can advance human development can help adaptability and generative capacities, as well its align socially desirable and privately profitable widespread accessibility and relative ease of use innovations. For example, AI can accelerate efforts through features such as natural language process- to tackle planetary challenges, such as biodiversity ing, which provide unique and novel opportunities. loss and climate change (spotlight 6.1).13 Crucially, But it also implies understanding what AI can- human agency must remain central to AI design, not do—or cannot do better than either humans development and deployment.14 or other digital technologies. A complementarity • Investing in capabilities that count. Choices should economy hinges in part on avoiding AI deployed be geared towards both investing in human capa- as “so-so technology” that merely mimics what bilities and leveraging AI to enhance access and CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 163 quality of education and health service delivery. basic learning capabilities, can be major barriers to AI’s flexibility and adaptability should be lever- seizing the opportunities of AI-augmented human aged to personalize education and healthcare in development. different development settings while attending to risks and concerns with bias, privacy and equity.15 “B y reimagining choices, we can shift the By tailoring learning or expanding healthcare, AI conversation from if and when AI can replace can also generate demand for complementary humans to how AI can enhance human human labour. potential and foster human development When integrated into education, AI should not be used as a crutch by teachers or students What matters is not predicting what will happen but as a companion to unleash new ways of but making choices so AI advances human develop- learning that allow us to move the focus beyond ment. AI is distinctive in its economywide applica- increasing years of schooling (quantity) towards bility,19 swift diffusion20 and growing opportunities achieving basic numeracy and literacy skills and for levelling the playing field in accessing advanced developing critical, creative and relational think- expertise (chapter 1). Seizing these opportuni- ing (quality). This involves deploying AI to scale ties depends on how AI is designed and deployed, up interventions known to enhance education as well as the business models and incentives that outcomes, such as customized learning, rather shape its use. The role of AI in shaping our socie- than deploying it for its own sake. In healthcare ties depends on choices. By reimagining choices, AI should be deployed to complement healthcare we can shift the conversation from if and when AI expertise—particularly when such experience is can replace humans to how AI can enhance human scarce—empowering healthcare workers to do development. more.16 Healthcare systems and organizations should ensure safe and transparent integration Building a complementarity economy of AI technologies into services—strengthening to expand development frontiers both institutional and frontline providers’ capac- ity to effectively use these new tools while clearly History has shown that occupations evolve and that communicating to patients how AI is employed in new occupations emerge as new technologies diffuse clinical decisionmaking. Because the unintended across the economy.21 But the speed and scope of side effects of AI in health services may change AI integration into our economies22 may pose novel over time, monitoring AI biases and health challenges and opportunities. AI does not have to inequalities needs to be seen as a continuous be a zero-sum game that pits humans against ma- process.17 chines. Policy choices can shape a “complementarity The pursuit of these three directions will have economy,” where AI amplifies the work humans are to take account of unfolding structural shifts in the already doing,23 supports inclusion in labour mar- global economy18 that are reshaping development kets24 and breaks open entirely new types of indus- opportunities (chapter 1). AI holds promise for ex- tries, jobs and tasks.25 Realizing these gains requires panding development trajectories, but it could also understanding how technological change inter- amplify risks if it becomes a source of fragmenta- acts with underlying labour market and economic tion that compounds geopolitical tensions and reg- structures and how AI differs from previous digital ulatory divergence, forcing countries to align with technologies. one approach or another, undermining cross-bor- In a complementarity economy, automation— der cooperation. Global disparities in the AI supply AI replacing human work—and augmentation—AI chain would then deepen inequalities across coun- boosting productivity and driving creation of new tries, especially if low and medium Human Develop- types of roles for human workers—happen in parallel. ment Index (HDI) countries are excluded from the Policies that tilt the balance towards augmentation supply side of AI (chapter 5). Pre-existing develop- are key while supporting people as they navigate dis- ment gaps in electricity and internet access, and in ruptions in the world of work. 164 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 People expect AI to change existing for targeted policies to ensure that women and peo- occupations and create new ones ple with lower levels of education also benefit from labour-enhancing AI opportunities. For many of the reasons outlined in chapter 1, new According to our survey, about half of respondents economic opportunities with AI may outweigh au- expect AI to lead to job automation. But an even larg- tomation and replacement, if labour-enhancing in- er share, 60 percent, expect new opportunities for centives and policies are put in place. Data on job job augmentation to arise. People in low and medium exposure to AI seem to confirm this (figure 6.1). HDI countries have higher expectations of shifts in Across HDI groups the augmentation exposure of cur- the labour market than people in very high HDI coun- rent employment is higher than the automation expo- tries (figure 6.3). In low and medium HDI countries sure. Female employment shows higher job exposure 70 percent of respondents expect that AI will help to AI augmentation than male employment.26 Howev- them increase their productivity at work, and 64 per- er, the largest share of jobs exposed to AI falls into “a cent expect that AI will help them find new job roles big unknown,” with potential for both augmentation that currently do not exist, while 57 percent expect and automation. Whether these roles will ultimately that their current jobs will be replaced due to AI. be augmented or automated is contingent on future AI’s ability to carry out work once thought of as technological progress and the choices made in re- exclusively in the realm of humans—such as com- sponse to those changes—presenting a major oppor- plex cognitive or creative tasks—is now challenging tunity to shape the future of work in ways that could the belief that automation technology affects mainly benefit workers and spur innovation and productivity. lower-skill workers engaged in routine tasks.28 How- However, exposure does not necessarily imply that ever, our survey results show that while respondents people are using AI for work.27 Our survey points to- expect automation to take place across occupations, wards an expected increase in use of AI tools for they also expect augmentation to occur (figures 6.4 work, even though a substantial share of people are and 6.5). Almost 40 percent of clerical workers—an still not using them (figure 6.2). Men and people with occupation that is typically portrayed as being at risk greater levels of education report higher use of AI for of AI automation—expect that AI will lead to trans- work—across all HDI groups, highlighting the need formational change of their jobs and perceive both Figure 6.1 Across Human Development Index (HDI) groups the largest share of jobs exposed to artificial intelligence (AI) falls into “a big unknown” Low Medium High Very high 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 Share of total employment exposed to AI (%) Augmentation Automation “Big unknown” CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 165 puorg IDH 2202 Source: Human Development Report Office using data from the International Labour Organization Harmonized Microdata Repository and the method described in Gmyrek, Berg and Bescond (2023). Figure 6.2 Men and people with greater levels of education report higher use of artificial intelligence (AI) for work— across all Human Development Index groups Completed primary or less Some secondary Completed secondary Completed university or more 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 Use AI tool for work (%) Female Male 166 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 level noitacudE Note: Based on pooled data for 21 countries. Use of AI for work refers to the responses to the question “In the past 30 days, have you interacted with artificial intelligence, such as chatbots, in any of the following ways? Work-related tools or software.” Source: Human Development Report Office based on the United Nations Development Programme Survey on AI and Human Development. Figure 6.3 More respondents in low and medium Human Development Index (HDI) countries expect labour market changes—through augmentation, automation and productivity boosts—with artificial intelligence Automation Augmentation Productivity boost (Current job significantly (Find new job roles that currently (Will increase productivity at work) changed or replaced) do not exist) Share of population (%) Share of population (%) Share of population (%) 80 80 80 68.6 69.5 69.7 70 70 63.8 70 56.9 57.5 60 60 60 54.0 51.6 50 50 50 40.0 40 40 40 30 30 30 20 20 20 10 10 10 0 0 0 Low or medium HDI High HDI Very high HDI Note: Based on pooled data for 21 countries. Expected effects of AI on jobs refer to the percentage of respondents who answered “very likely” or “likely” to the questions “Your current job will be significantly changed or replaced by AI” (automation), “AI will help you find new job roles that cur- rently do not exist” (augmentation), and “AI will increase your productivity at work” (productivity boost), as well as 50 percent of the respondents who answered “neutral.” Source: Human Development Report Office based on the United Nations Development Programme Survey on AI and Human Development. Figure 6.4 Across occupations and Human Development have a hard time capturing quality improvements Index levels, respondents expect that artificial intelligence from technologies, as well as the effects of services, will both automate and augment their work — with higher especially digitally delivered services, which account expectations of augmentation for an increasing share of employment and value added.32 So how to assess the economic potential of AI? Rather than making predictions, examining the Expected automation (%) mechanisms through which it can drive change and 100 identifying where these effects might emerge provide a more nuanced understanding that can support bet- ter-informed decisionmaking (box 6.1).33 80 Unlike technologies narrowly focused on a specific activity or task, AI—and particularly generative AI—is 60 more akin to a general purpose technology in that it has economywide applicability34 and may affect more and more tasks.35 Multimodality, adaptability and 40 generalizability are key features of novel AI systems, and use cases already range from economics research assistance36 to medical image analysis for early dis- 20 ease detection37 and from customer service support38 to helping with novels or screenplays.39 0 AI presents multiple opportunities for augmenting 0 2 0 4 0 60 80 100 what people are already doing at work. It can help Expected augmentation (%) workers complete tasks faster and at higher quality,40 boost their creativity41 and speed up learning process- Note: Based on pooled data for 21 countries. Each dot represents the per- es, raising productivity for newer recruits and those centages of respondents in an occupation group in a country who expect au- with lower performance.42 Beyond the direct effects tomation and augmentation from AI to affect their occupation. The following occupational groups are used: professional/higher administrative, skilled, un- associated with more productive execution of tasks skilled/semi- skilled, services, clerical, farm and other. The shaded area repre- currently done by workers, the more far-reaching sents a higher share of respondents expecting augmentation than automation. Source: Human Development Report Office based on data from the United economic potential of AI may lie in its second- and Nations Development Programme Survey on AI and Human Development. third-order effects—in its potential for spillovers and augmentation opportunities and automation risks) its integration with technological progress.43 (figure 6.5). Overall, 4 of 10 respondents expect to be These economic spillovers and dynamic effects affected by both augmentation and automation, so can drive productivity gains beyond those achieved while they believe that their current jobs will be sub- through pre-AI digital tools, potentially foster- stantially changed by AI, they also expect that AI will ing novel industries and value chains, if regulato- create new job roles that do not currently exist. ry frameworks ensure fair competition and prevent rent-seeking behaviour.44 Without such safeguards New economic possibility frontiers— market concentration may stifle innovation,45 inflate avoiding “so-so” technology prices and concentrate productivity gains among a few dominant players. If AI functions primarily as a Despite rapidly expanding AI use, macro-level pro- “so-so technology”46—delivering cost savings for in- ductivity impacts remain elusive:29 today, AI seems to dividual firms without driving broader productivity be “everywhere but in the productivity statistics.”30 gains—its potential to expand economic opportuni- There are several reasons why this might be the case. ties and enhance innovation may be limited.47 Estimates of job exposure to AI vary substantially,31 Prioritizing AI as an enabler for innovation and the translation from AI job exposure to AI use and intelligence augmentation is likely to yield far more from AI use to productivity impacts is not straight- benefits than focusing on automation alone.48 Bal- forward and current systems of national accounting ancing policies that caution the use of AI with those CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 167 Figure 6.5 Across occupations respondents expect transformational change to their work Expected replacement (share of respondents within group) 15 Clerical 14 Professional/higher administrative Unskilled/ 13 semi-skilled Other Farm 12 Service (including sales) Skilled 11 30 32 34 36 38 40 42 44 46 Expected transformational change (share of respondents within group) Note: Based on pooled data for 21 countries. Each point represents the expected replacement (automation with no augmentation) and transforma- tional (automation and augmentation) change for an occupation group. Source: Human Development Report Office based on the United Nations Development Programme Survey on AI and Human Development. Box 6.1 Assessing artificial intelligence’s productivity effects Artificial intelligence (AI) is expected to yield considerable productivity impacts, but empirical findings remain inconclu- sive.1 The magnitude, timing and distribution of productivity effects are uncertain and depend heavily on the methodol- ogy and assumptions.2 The US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine has proposed a framework for assessing AI’s productivity effects by identifying key factors that may shape its impact.3 The factors provide a helpful overview of the conditions that influence AI adoption, the channels through which AI can affect productivity and the potential barriers to realizing its full economic impact. They include: • Share of the economy in which the technology can be applied and size of the productivity effect in those applica- tions. This follows from Hulten’s theorem, which shows that in well-functioning economies an increase in total factor productivity in one industry will change the overall output in an economy in proportion to the industry’s share of total sales.4 AI is seen as a general purpose technology; it has economywide applicability beyond specific industries.5 The productivity effects in particular industries, by contrast, depend on whether AI primarily replaces humans or augments what humans are doing.6 • Complements and bottlenecks. Deploying a new technology without considering parallel investment would likely yield disappointing results. Workers need complementary skills,7 and firms and organizations may need to adjust workflows to fully leverage AI. Digital infrastructure is critical, and targeted investment may be needed in many regions.8 Furthermore, governance frameworks might require time to adjust to new technologies. Informal institu- tions, such as those for social cohesion and trust, can also act as complements or bottlenecks to realizing the technology’s potential.9 • Time lags and measurement. Both benefits and costs from technological innovation may be hard to quantify, especially for a general purpose technology. Some AI-driven benefits, such as enhanced learning through per- sonalized tutoring (at low cost), might not show up in productivity statistics at all or only after a considerable time lag.10 Productivity gains often take time, as economies, firms and workers adapt, bottlenecks are addressed and complementarity investments are made. However, AI’s productivity impacts may materialize faster than those in (continued) 168 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Box 6.1 Assessing artificial intelligence’s productivity effects (continued) previous waves of technological innovation. AI’s adaptive and learning capabilities, decreasing costs of comput- ing and the fast-paced adoption across the world may all shorten the time lag between innovation and productiv- ity.11 Generative AI in particular is spreading faster than earlier technology, such as the internet or the personal computer.12 • Economic spillovers. Both the benefits and costs of technological innovation can spill over from the private in- novator to other parts of society. AI, with its many use cases, may have large impacts through these spillovers. For example, improving medical diagnosis13 can have positive spillovers to public health, while negative spillovers such as rent seeking or widespread AI-generated misinformation could distort markets and limit AI’s economic potential.14 • Heterogeneity within and across businesses and sectors. The extent to which AI enhances productivity in a sector or for a firm is contingent on industry dynamics and firms’ adaptability and technological readiness. For example, sectors with high digital penetration may have an easier time integrating AI applications and driving productivity gains. Firms able to adapt organizational structures and workflows to AI and leverage AI for product innovation may see higher growth15 than those slower to adapt. Disparities within firms may arise between workers who are able to leverage AI to augment their work and workers who struggle to integrate it into their work or see large parts of their tasks displaced. • Dynamic effects. Beyond spillovers AI’s third-order effects include the potential to accelerate innovation and scientific discovery, key contributors to productivity gains. By processing vast amounts of data and identifying pat- terns16 or by automating time-consuming tasks and enabling people to focus on higher-order problem solving and creativity, AI could greatly increase the pace of new breakthroughs, reshaping long-term productivity trajectories. Notes 1. Comunale and Manera 2024. 2. Berg and Gmyrek 2024. 3. US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine 2024. 4. Hulten 1978. 5. Crafts 2021. 6. Acemoğlu and Restrepo 2019b. 7. UN and ILO 2024. 8. World Bank 2024c. 9. Antonietti, Burlina and Rodriguez-Pose 2025. 10. Coyle 2025. 11. Crafts 2021. 12. Liu, Wang and Zhenwhei Qiang 2024. 13. Wang and Preininger 2019. 14. Fallis 2021. 15. Babina and others 2024. 16. Mullainathan and Rambachan 2024. geared to using AI can unlock productivity and open compositions may experience AI’s diffusion and im- new possibility frontiers.49 The net effect of the AI pact in different ways, and complementarity strat- revolution on economies is likely contingent on coun- egies need to be attuned to context. Currently, tries’ “ability to innovate, adopt and adapt to AI.”50 higher-income economies with greater digitalization For low- and middle-income economies it can pres- and a workforce more accustomed to using digital ent a major opportunity for economic diversification51 tools may be better positioned to harness AI.55 For ex- by lowering barriers to access to advanced expertise ample, in Latin America a substantial share of work- (chapter 1), enabling and streamlining trade52 and im- ers who are employed in jobs that could benefit from proving service delivery in education, healthcare and AI do not have access to or are not using computers other public services, in addition to enabling financial in their day-to-day work—limiting the potential of AI inclusion.53 This requires investment in infrastruc- augmentation.56 ture, workforce training and inclusive digital ecosys- So, how to steer towards complementarity? Work- tems (box 6.2). ers’ agency and influence—directly in their work and through social dialogue—have to be part of a broad package of policies that prioritize investment in Seizing on the complementarity human–machine collaboration.57 between AI and people Fiscal policy shapes economic incentives and can direct investment in research and development, A critical determinant of AI’s productivity impact as well as how firms adopt AI. While the impact of is the degree to which it can be applied across econ- AI on productivity across workers is not complete- omies.54 Countries with different sectoral compo- ly straightforward, and implications for wage dis- sitions, institutional capacities and workforce skill tribution remain uncertain, digital technological CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 169 Box 6.2 Smart systems, shared goals: The complementarity of artificial intelligence and digital public infrastructure Traditionally, infrastructure has been associated with physical assets such as roads, electricity grids and water sys- tems that provide essential services for public use. Digital public infrastructure is a multidimensional approach to national digital transformation that relies on both physical and virtual systems. At its core, digital public infrastructure is about building and managing digital systems that support essential services in today’s society. These systems include proving one’s identity online, sending money quickly and securely and sharing information safely—with the right privacy protections and consent.1 Services aim to be inclusive so no one is left out, foundational so others can build on them, interoperable through open standards that can support diverse uses and publicly accountable to ensure they serve the public interest rather than private or siloed goals.2 Digital public infrastructure can speed up the use of AI. Many AI applications need both unstructured and struc- tured data. Structured data often come from different government registries and databases, which are usually spread across ministries, departments and agencies. For example, in India AI is helping farmers get real-time support, includ- ing access to insurance and subsidies in their local languages—something that depends on combining many different data sources.3 AI can enhance digital public infrastructure. Unlike traditional infrastructure, digital public infrastructure is highly scalable, adaptable and reusable, offering unprecedented innovation potential. For instance, Stripe—a global pay- ments platform—uses machine learning to spot signs of fraud by analysing unusual transaction patterns, shifts in pur- chasing behaviour and changes in device details.4 Similarly, AI powers biometric authentication in digital ID systems, which is especially useful where fingerprint recognition does not work well. This approach has been promoting inclu- sion, as, for example, many agricultural and manual workers face fingerprint erosion, making alternative biometric methods more reliable.5 Despite the growing potential, research on the causal links between digital public infrastructure and AI remains limited. More work is needed to understand how these two concepts can reinforce each other, what risks their interaction may pose and how policymakers should approach their integration, ensuring that benefits are widely distributed and reinforcing human agency, trust and fairness in the digital age.6 Notes 1. Eaves and Sandman 2021. 2. Eaves, Mazzucato and Vasconcellos 2024. 3. D’Silva and others 2019. 4. Adams 2025. 5. Digital public infrastructure can be vulnerable to serious threats, such as disinformation campaigns that undermine public confidence. A notable example comes from Brazil, where false information about a new regulation related to Pix—an instant digital payment platform—circulated widely, impacting more than 9.4 million people in 2025 (Luciano and Fleck 2025). 6. Rikap 2024. advancements have tended to be accompanied by which struggle with closing tax revenue gaps and in- larger capital investment and higher capital shares creasing the tax-to-GDP ratio beyond 15 percent—a of income.58 The relevant lens for tax policy may thus threshold associated with positive effects of taxation involve rebalancing capital and labour taxation to eq- on economic growth and development.63 Expand- uitably distribute productivity gains and encourage ing fiscal space through improved revenue collection investment in labour-complementing technology.59 can in turn fund critical complementarity invest- The design of such taxation matters and should be ment—in education, skills development and digital carefully considered. For example, while taxing spe- infrastructure. cific technologies—for example, a “robot tax”—may Beyond taxation public investment in research and hamper innovation in a particular field,60 broader development of labour-enhancing AI, along with stra- instruments such as capital income tax may achieve tegic subsidies for firms to adopt these types of tech- both efficiency and equity.61 nologies, can tip the balance towards AI as an enabler AI itself can be leveraged as a tool for improving tax for augmentation and innovation.64 Public–private revenue by enhancing compliance and increasing ad- partnerships can drive labour-enhancing AI innova- ministrative efficiency. AI-driven tools can help gov- tion and bridge gaps between research and develop- ernments monitor complex financial transactions, ment, business cases and societal needs (see box 6.4 detect fraud and reduce evasion.62 Strengthening later in the chapter). For example, in Mexico a newly tax systems is important for developing economies, established private sector–academia collaboration, 170 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 GenAI Laboratory, is connecting research, education up-to-date information about the types of expertise and real-world AI-applications.65 in demand across sectors and regions.72 Investing in complementarity implies establishing AI might reshape demand for different types of ex- a level playing field in economies and enabling firms pertise. By increasing access to advanced expertise, of all sizes and across all sectors to engage in the AI it may make some types of specialized knowledge economy.66 In many places this starts with closing less exclusive while raising demand for others (chap- digital divides and enabling universal and meaning- ter 1). The implications for developing economies are ful connectivity (spotlight 6.2). Robust high-speed particularly important. Where access to advanced internet networks serve as the backbone for imple- expertise has historically been limited, AI-powered menting more advanced digital tools,67 but govern- tools could bridge gaps in education, healthcare and ments can go further by advancing and integrating AI financial services and enable workers to perform into digital public infrastructure (see box 6.2). Public- higher-value tasks with less formal training.73 For ex- ly accessible AI infrastructure—such as shared com- ample, in some parts of Kenya, Nigeria and South Af- puting resources, open source AI models and publicly rica, AI solutions are enabling smallholder farmers to curated datasets—can democratize AI development engage in precision agriculture, optimizing resource and adoption. Furthermore, well-designed compe- efficiency, enhancing yields and reducing environ- tition policies can foster a competitive and dynamic mental harms.74 technological ecosystem that drives innovation and However, as AI reshapes the demand for expertise, ensures that AI-driven gains are broadly distribut- some jobs may see less demand while new ones are ed rather than concentrated among a few dominant created. New roles might not require the same types players.68 of expertise or might emerge in a different sector or place from where job losses occur.75 Robust social “P ublicly accessible AI infrastructure— protection systems, along with active labour market such as shared computing resources, open policies, can mitigate income losses and help people source AI models and publicly curated navigate shifting work demands.76 datasets—can democratize AI development and adoption. Furthermore, well-designed competition policies can foster a competitive Including workers in AI gains and governance and dynamic technological ecosystem that drives innovation and ensures that AI-driven While AI offers great potential for productivity gains, gains are broadly distributed rather than the gains, if materialized, might not be evenly dis- concentrated among a few dominant players tributed.77 Taxation and social transfers can help en- sure that AI-induced productivity gains also benefit Fast AI diffusion and adoption can be disruptive workers broadly,78 but premarket policies such as col- because overall workforce skill composition may lective bargaining and social dialogue are also impor- take time to adjust. Vocational programmes that are tant for guiding a fair and inclusive transition towards adaptive and aligned with emerging industry needs an AI-powered economy (spotlight 6.3). can bridge skills gaps quickly and improve employ- To do so, worker inclusion and influence in work- ment prospects,69 while on-the-job training and place AI governance is crucial. The generative nature upskilling may support those whose jobs and tasks of some AI implies that human oversight, control and are reshaped by AI.70 Public–private partnerships and contextual understanding matter both to maximize other multistakeholder alliances can support learn- potential and to avoid risks associated with overreli- ing systems that remain responsive to the evolving ance on AI systems.79 When human involvement in demands of an AI-driven economy and bridge gaps work is diminished, it can lead to moral disengage- between formal education, vocational training and ment, where individuals become detached from the industry needs.71 For example, initiatives such as the ethical and behavioural norms that usually guide Organisation for Economic Co-operation and De- their actions.80 When people feel disconnected, their velopment’s (OECD) Skills for Jobs database offers sense of accountability may diminish, increasing the CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 171 risk of errors and safety issues—especially in high- the value they create is distributed. As AI expands ly automated settings.81 Algorithmic management and becomes ever more integrated into our econo- systems, designed to improve efficiency through mies, it presents an opportunity for high-quality tech- monitoring and automation of work allocation, may nology-generated jobs. A complementarity economy instead increase errors and disrupt entire workflows recognizes and values workers at every stage of the if they push workers to engage in multitasking and to supply chain,91 towards ensuring meaningful oppor- oversee simultaneous workflows at ever higher speed tunities, fair compensation and decent working con- (box 6.3). ditions. The future of work in the age of AI should be Similarly, digital surveillance in the workplace— one of genuine collaboration between humans and including email monitoring, keystroke tracking and machines92—not one built on a hidden global work- social media scrutiny—can create considerable psy- force facing decent work deficits. chological stress for employees.82 While these prac- tices aim to enhance productivity and data security, Driving innovation with intent: they also contribute to workplace anxiety.83 Employ- Aligning socially and privately ees can feel a loss of freedom and trust when sub- valuable AI research jected to excessive surveillance, reducing their motivation and job satisfaction.84 Aligning socially desirable with privately profitable Instead, engaging workers in the design and de- AI research and development is a transformative op- ployment of AI systems can enhance their roles and portunity to advance human development.93 AI might boost AI’s productive impact. Transparent AI inter- become more than just another technological innova- faces that provide real-time explanations can reduce tion able to execute or augment tasks. Like other tech- confusion and cognitive overload, enabling workers nological innovations, it can increase the productivity to interact with AI more intuitively and effectively.85 of factors of production, but it differs in that it can also Employers should involve employees in discussions increase the rate of technological innovation.94 AI’s about surveillance policies, provide training on the potential to improve the productivity of research and use of monitoring data and ensure that employees are innovation is particularly important in today’s world, informed of how their data are used.86 Workers who given evidence that disruptive science and techno- feel included in monitoring decisions are more likely logical innovation was declining through 2010 (fig- to accept them.87 An opt-in approach to monitoring, ure 6.6).95 The number of researchers that is required where employees have agency over how their data today to keep Moore’s law going (the doubling of the are used, can further reinforce trust and workplace number of transistors in an integrated circuit every wellbeing.88 two years) is 18 times more than in the early 1970s.96 Furthermore, the allure of AI has created an image But despite AI’s potential to accelerate techno- of almost completely autonomous systems, near- logical progress and scientific discovery,97 current ly free from human intervention beyond the bril- innovation incentives are geared towards rapid de- liant programmers who developed them.89 In reality, ployment, scale and automation—often at the cost AI depends heavily on human workers in every step of transparency, fairness and social inclusion.98 Fur- of the supply chain. Lower-value-added activities, thermore, disparities in funding and expertise have such as data labelling and annotation, are often con- resulted in uneven participation in AI research and centrated in low- and middle-income countries, re- development. quiring intensive human labour but offering limited Thus, driving innovation with intent means har- rewards. In contrast, higher-value-added tasks, such nessing AI for science and technological innova- as AI model design and deployment, are confined tion and steering AI towards human development largely to high-income countries, demanding special- through incentives, including novel AI benchmarks, ized knowledge and infrastructure.90 and through multistakeholder partnerships.99 Open The reliance on human labour across the AI supply source AI can expand access to AI tools and foster chain highlights the need to examine who contrib- broader participation in innovation. While openness utes to AI systems, under what conditions and how also raises critical privacy and security concerns,100 172 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Box 6.3 Who’s the boss? The rise of algorithmic management in the automobile manufacturing sector Uma Rani and Morgan Williams, International Labour Organization Many of today’s algorithmic management tools are rooted in 1980s and 1990s technologies.1 In automobile manufacturing electronic work instructions and other systems were introduced to prevent errors along the assembly line. Their functionality has advanced considerably, resulting in systems that often layer new capabilities onto older operating systems.2 Today the integration of sensors and data management software in the automobile sector has intensified the work pace, monitoring and traceability (box figure 1). Automated systems dictate workflows, often pushing workers to keep up with a relent- less machine-driven pace and increasing the demand for workers to maintain speed and meet targets. This is done through both electronic work instructions and automated guided vehicles. In addition, workers and mid-level managers may be required to monitor multiple screens, inputs and outputs simultaneously, often while performing physical tasks on the assembly line. Box figure 1 Contemporary algorithmic management in automobile manufacturing ASSEMBLY LINE WORKERS MANAGERS AUTOMATED QUALITY DECISION PRODUCT SURVEILLANCE CONTROL SUPPORT DELIVERY Electronic work Automated guided Bar and QR codes Management systems instructions vehicles (such as enterprise resource planning, customer interaction management, management information system, warehouse management system) Closed circuit television Poka-yokea Instant messaging Sensors applications • Sets pace and rhythm • Real-time traceability • Data collection • Requires multitasking • Performance evaluation • Tightens just-in-time • Repetition of process • Increases accountability dynamics if a mistake is done as mistakes are recorded Impacts: Work intensification and increases stress a. Pick-to-light and pick-to-voice systems that use light signals and voice instructions respectively to guide workers in executing their manual tasks. Source: Rani and Williams 2025. (continued) CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 173 Box 6.3 Who’s the boss? The rise of algorithmic management in the automobile manufacturing sector (continued) The pressure to maintain speed created by automated systems that are designed to reduce errors and the complexity of multitasking that the systems introduce can paradoxically increase the likelihood of mistakes. When errors occur, the system often requires repeating the entire process or segment, further disrupting the workflow and potentially reducing overall pro- ductivity. Real-time data tighten just-in-time processes, as any deviation from the prescribed workflow can have immediate repercussions across the entire production line. This technological integration also enables granular, real-time traceability of worker actions, creating a panopticon-like environment (observing workers who do not know whether they are being ob- served). The possibility of linking errors to individual workers can foster fear and stress, as workers feel constantly scrutinized and apprehensive about making even minor mistakes. The data collected can be used for performance reviews, compensation considerations, promotion opportunities and even job security. The constant surveillance, pressure to meet algorithmically determined targets and potential for disciplinary action based on automated performance metrics erode the trust between managers and workers. So it is important to shift the balance of power towards workers and take steps to rebuild trust, emphasizing human oversight and worker empowerment. The pace and rhythm of work dictated by these systems must be reassessed and set within more realistic timeframes and parameters that prioritize worker wellbeing and acknowledge the limits of human capacity. Algorithmic systems should be tools that assist workers, not instruments that control and constrain them. Codetermination and social dialogue are essential for regulating the impact of technology. Meaningful worker participation in the design, implementation and governance of these technologies is paramount—not only consultation but also genuine negotiation and shared decisionmaking over how the systems are used and how performance is measured. Workers, with their intimate understanding of the work process, are best positioned to identify potential pitfalls and unintended consequences of algorithmic management. Note 1. This box builds on Rani and Morgan (2025). 2. Krzywdzinski, Gerst and Butollo 2023. research can be directed to address some of the vul- Though evidence suggests that AI can trigger cre- nerabilities of open source technologies by involving ativity and innovation across a variety of contexts,104 a wide variety of organizations with different goals the reasons that AI and human collaboration are more and incentives.101 likely to do so remain under examination.105 Deploying AI in research requires consistency with the norms of scientific practice.106 AI will likely require changes in Harnessing AI as the invention of a the way humans interact with it, rather than simply re- method of invention to expand human placing classical programming with AI-powered tools. understanding and creativity For example, using AI-summarized results from web searches tends to lead to shallower knowledge and less AI’s potential to accelerate technological innovation original advice than a traditional web search.107 One and human creativity is illustrated by the improved must look at AI as going beyond simply plug and play, performance of human Go players. Essentially flat for beyond replacing existing research methods with AI. decades, human performance in the game started to Guidance is emerging on how to make the best use increase after the AI model AlphaGo beat the leading of AI to advance science and the kinds of risks to watch Go master in March 2016 (figure 6.7). Fan Hui, then for.108 Focusing on the key complementarities between the European Go champion, was both awed and sur- humans and AI in the creative process provides a for- prised in describing one of AlphaGo’s moves: “It’s ward-looking perspective.109 One complementarity is not a human move. I’ve never seen a human play this that AI does some things very well that are harder for move. So beautiful.”102 The higher quality of human humans (seeing new things in data), while humans do Go players’ moves was due to their novelty, not to other things well that AI struggles with (seeing things copying of AlphaGo’s moves. AI inspired human cre- not in data to generate novel theories).110 Mixing fore- ativity by doing something never seen before, aug- casts from AI models with those from human experts menting human intelligence.103 yields better predictions than those of human experts 174 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Figure 6.6 Disruptive science and technological innovation was on a steady decline through 2010 Papers Patents Average CD Average CD 5 5 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1 0 0 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 1980 1990 2000 2010 Life sciences and biomedicine Chemical Physical sciences Computers and communications Social sciences Drugs and medical Technology Electrical and electronic Mechanical Note: CD (calculating disruption) is an index of the extent to which a paper or patent disrupted established scientific or technological knowledge, 5 rendering it obsolete and charting new directions. It measures disruption by the extent to which citations of a disruptive paper or patent also cite its predecessors, with 0 corresponding to consolidation of existing knowledge and 1 corresponding to disruptive. The index is measured five years after the paper was published (hence the subscript 5). Source: Park, Leahey and Funk 2023. Figure 6.7 Artificial intelligence can inspire humans to reach new heights in creativity Median decision quality index of human Go players 1.7 AlphaGo defeats human world champion (March 2016) 0.8 0.0 –0.8 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2021 Note: Vertical lines are 95 percent confidence intervals, excluding the potential effect of memorization of AlphaGo moves after 2016. Source: Shin and others 2023. CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 175 or AI alone.111 And AI combined with remote sensing of complementarity between AI and human creativ- can help identify tipping points in natural systems— ity requires making people more aware of the risks.136 providing essential information for buffering against It also requires purposefully building machines meant changes in the natural world.112 to learn and think with people rather than just focusing Scientific discoveries are at times limited by the on the capabilities of machines that surpass people.137 rate at which existing approaches parse and process The pursuit of human and AI collaboration to ad- data. For example, the search space for new materi- vance arts and science needs to consider novel risks als is vast, with as many as 10108 organic molecules and challenges that are under close scrutiny and add as possible candidates.113 The vast majority of these uncertainty to whether AI’s potential for accelerating compounds may be of limited, if any, practical value, innovation can be fully realized.138 Broader systemic such that searching the space efficiently is unreason- implications of AI use to boost scientific productivity able for human effort alone. But techniques that use include the potential tradeoff between affecting indi- AI to identify candidates are rapidly improving, em- vidual creative productivity with AI and making cre- powering humans by narrowing the search.114 In ma- ative output less diverse, potentially leading to less terials science an AI application led to the discovery collective diversity of novel content.139 The implica- of 2.2 million new crystals.115 And in another applica- tions for job satisfaction and deriving meaning from tion AI-assisted researchers discovered 44 percent work when interacting with AI are still not well un- more materials than the pre-AI trend, increasing pat- derstood.140 The synthetic data produced by genera- ent filings by 39 percent and downstream product in- tive AI create new ethical challenges for scientists,141 novation by 17 percent.116 Similar applications of AI including how to fulfil norms of scientific conduct to detect data patterns that may not be perceptible by such as accountability, transparency, replicability and humans can extend to the economic and broader so- human responsibility.142 And adequately compensat- cial sciences.117 ing creators of much of the content to train AI raises Applications of AI are spreading rapidly across new questions related to intellectual protection law many fields, with published scholarly papers engaging and liability when things go wrong.143 AI increasing from around 2 percent in 2015 to over 8 percent around 2024.118 In the humanities AI can aug- “A I’s contributions to science will ment the availability of historical economic data.119 likely be greatest when it augments In archaeology AI has enabled archaeologists to dou- humans doing the science ble the number of identified figurative geoglyphs in Nazca, Peru, insights that led researchers to a new So, despite AI’s potential its applications in science hypothesis.120 Applications of AI in economics are ac- and research can produce flawed, overly optimistic or celerating121 and spreading to other social sciences, hard to reproduce results.144 More fundamentally, the including political science.122 Applications also span a goal is not to produce more science but to understand range of scientific and technological fields, including more about the world and about ourselves, and there biology,123 chemistry,124 conservation science,125 drug is a risk that the proliferation of AI in science will discovery,126 geology,127 materials science,128 mathe- yield more results but less understanding.145 From matics,129 neuroscience,130 physics131 and psychology.132 a human development perspective the value of sci- Augmenting AI with scientific models can combine ence ultimately comes not from the nominal rate of understanding that comes from science with the AI ca- discoveries but from the rate at which those discov- pabilities to extract patterns from data.133 Applications eries are important to people. It is also crucial to see include combining physics-based models to predict science and creative processes more broadly as in- weather and climate, with AI trained on past weather herently human endeavours—where spontaneity and data to improve forecasting.134 There is also potential serendipity from interactions between humans, as to leverage the complementarity between humans well as very human mistakes that no machine would and AI to enhance innovation at larger societal scales, make, can engender creativity.146 AI’s contributions beyond specific labs or scientific fields, by enhancing to science will likely be greatest when it augments hu- collective intelligence.135 Fully leveraging the potential mans doing the science. 176 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Aligning AI research towards of overall AI research.153 While fields such as com- advancing human development puter vision dominate due to their extensive com- mercial applications and robotics continues to thrive Ensuring that AI advances human development de- in industrial contexts, AI safety remains a marginal pends in part on aligning AI innovation incentives in focus in most AI applications and across regions.154 different ways. That includes, for instance, avoiding Even in research-intensive regions such as East Asia creating innovation traps,147 which could undermine and the Pacific and OECD members, AI safety is AI paths that advance human development.148 This underrepresented. For example, although China and could be achieved if AI research and development the United States lead global AI research, their pri- adopt a broader perspective seeking to align AI ad- orities diverge—with Chinese efforts centring on ro- vancements with societal goals, pluralism and inclu- botics and computer vision and US research slightly sion rather than being narrowly driven by contested favouring natural language processing, alongside a or speculative pursuits.149 modest lead in AI safety.155 Another promising area of research is small lan- “O ne aspect of the human development– guage models, which, unlike large language mod- aligned AI path relates to safety, an area els, offer advantages in data security and privacy that has yet to receive investment and because they are designed for specific use cases, research attention commensurate with its providing more targeted, cost-effective and secure potential economic and social impact solutions.156 This makes them particularly well-suit- ed for developing country settings, where resource To foster AI innovation that enhances human de- constraints are a critical consideration. Deploying velopment, AI benchmarks, which have become small language models without internet connectiv- fundamental tools for evaluating the performance, ity is feasible through on-device implementation. capabilities and safety of AI models, could also be This approach increases data privacy, reduces laten- expanded. While important, current metrics tell us cy and ensures continuous operation in areas with very little about how much AI is augmenting human unreliable internet access. Take InkubaLM, a small development. To align AI more closely with human language model designed to make AI tools more ac- development, new benchmarks should be researched cessible for African languages. It performs as well as and deployed, assessing how AI contributes to human larger models while being more efficient, using two wellbeing, opportunity and agency (chapter 4).150 specialized datasets to enhance tasks such as trans- Tax strategies can incentivize greater financial lation and sentiment analysis. By advancing research commitments from major technology companies and on smaller models, researchers can create fairer, public entities and steer research and development more sustainable AI options for underserved and towards AI systems that advance human capabilities, lower-resourced communities.157 while discouraging investment that promotes auto- The disparity in AI resources, expertise and infra- mation-driven labour displacement. Tools such as structure between high-income and low- to middle- public–private partnerships, public procurement pol- income countries—directly affects who benefits from icies, regulatory sandboxes, impact-based funding AI and who is left behind.158 High-income countries and outcome-driven investment mechanisms, along possess substantial investment capacity, technologi- with novel benchmarks, can help shift the balance.151 cal infrastructure, data and AI talent, enabling them Together, these measures could fund and rebal- to lead in AI innovation and AI safety (chapter 5). In ance AI research and development towards human contrast, many low- and middle-income countries development–enhancing technologies. struggle with insufficient funding, weak digital infra- Another aspect of the human development–aligned structure and a shortage of skilled professionals, lim- AI path relates to safety, an area that has yet to re- iting their participation in AI development.159 This ceive investment and research attention commensu- divide not only restricts access to AI benefits but also rate with its potential economic and social impact,152 reinforces global inequalities in advancing AI for given that AI safety accounts for only about 2 percent human development. CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 177 Strengthening global collaboration through part- Partnerships would need to be structured to ensure nerships160 would promote a more balanced distri- that local priorities are not overshadowed by the inter- bution of AI benefits, ensuring that regions at all ests of higher HDI countries.163 AI safety frameworks income levels can contribute to and benefit from must incorporate diverse perspectives, accounting for AI-driven progress.161 Low HDI countries experi- regional ethics, governance structures and societal enced the fastest growth in collaborative AI research norms.164 This inclusivity is essential to strengthening outputs between 2014 and 2023. This is a positive AI safety outcomes, ensuring that AI tools are both con- sign, but it is due mainly to a low baseline—in fact, textually relevant and globally adaptable. Partnerships the gaps widen substantially as HDI increases. Medi- in AI not only bring together diverse areas of expertise um HDI countries also made considerable progress, but could also drive substantial investment in digital while high and very high HDI countries exhibited infrastructure, research and talent development. By slower but solid growth. In absolute terms there is aligning the interests of government agencies, academ- divergence: the distance between low HDI countries ic institutions, industry leaders and the broader public, and very high HDI countries is now larger than a dec- these collaborations would help ensure that future AI ade ago.162 progress advances human development (box 6.4). Box 6.4 Bridging bytes and governments: Artificial intelligence ecosystems through partnerships Several countries are pioneering new models for inclusive artificial intelligence (AI) ecosystems and partnerships. For example, the Republic of Korea is a global leader in AI research and development, with a mix of public and private investment in frontier technologies leading to more than 1,500 AI patent filings in the first 10 months of 2024.1 The National AI Computing Center, backed by joint public–private investment,2 aims to enhance Korea’s AI research infrastructure and secure high-performance computing resources (graphics processing units). The initiative is spearheaded by the Ministry of Science and ICT in col- laboration with the Ministry of Economy and Finance, the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy and the Financial Services Commission.3 Complementing this, Korea is launching the National AI Research Hub in 2025 to foster collaboration between government and industry and to accelerate AI development nationwide.4 Similarly, AI Singapore brings together Singapore-based research institutions, AI startups, companies and the public sector to develop national AI capabilities and foster a trusted AI ecosystem that addresses global challenges such as health and climate change.5 And AI Sweden operates as a nonprofit partner network of more than 150 organizations spanning diverse sectors and disciplines—from AI experts, data scientists, research engineers, linguists and mathematicians to policy specialists, lawyers, journalists and changemakers—working together to drive sustainable and inclusive AI progress across, for example, healthcare, energy systems and local municipalities in Sweden.6 Another example is Current AI, which highlights the transformative potential of public–private partnerships by developing AI solutions that serve the public interest through global collaboration and local implementation. The initiative focuses on building an open AI ecosystem by unlocking valuable datasets, promoting open standards and tools to increase acces- sibility and ensuring transparency and trust through public interest auditing and oversight. Backed by major technology companies—including Google—and the French government, Current AI aims to deliver AI systems that genuinely serve the public good.7 The private sector is also advancing multistakeholder alliances. For example, the Partnership on AI is a global nonprofit organization8 whose founding members were Amazon, Facebook, DeepMind, Google, IBM and Microsoft. It unites more than 100 partner organizations from industry, academia and civil society to address the societal implications of artificial intelligence. By fostering collaboration among diverse stakeholders, the organization develops best practices, conducts research and promotes the responsible development and use of AI technologies. Through initiatives such as creating frameworks for safe AI deployment and investigating challenges to diversity in AI, it aims to ensure that AI advancements are ethical and transparent. These examples show that partnerships offer a structured and scalable approach to ensuring AI as a safe and equitable technology aligned with human development priorities. Notes 1. Buntz 2024. 2. Dae-Hyun 2024. 3. Kim Eun-jin 2025. 4. Republic of Korea Ministry of Science and ICT 2024. 5. Smart Nation and Digital Government Office n.d. 6. AI Sweden n.d. AI Sweden is funded by Sweden’s innovation agency Vinnova, the Swedish Agency for Economic and Regional Growth, the European Regional Development Fund, and contributions from its network of partners. 7. Current AI n.d. 8. PAI 2024. 178 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Investing in capabilities that capabilities and quantity-based metrics. For example, count: Can AI enhance education expected years of schooling are at their highest on and health outcomes? record, and the global percentage of children out of primary school is now in the single digits.166 In health, AI offers new possibilities to advance human devel- life expectancy at birth has increased by 8.4 years opment by enhancing achievements in education and globally since 1990.167 health, but substantial challenges are inherent in its de- But gaps persist and even widen when it comes to ployment. Underresourced institutions are more likely enhanced capabilities, as highlighted in the 2019 to adopt questionable AI solutions—a tendency close- Human Development Report. In education there ly tied to technosolutionism (chapter 4).165 Often the are enormous gaps in students’ functional compe- focus is on deploying technology (such as one laptop tencies.168 Globally, only around 40 percent of chil- per child) or cultivating specific technology-based skills dren achieve basic skills in math and science.169 The (coding) without sufficient attention to the broader proportion ranges from about 4 percent in low HDI goal of enhancing human development. The context— countries to 67 percent in very high HDI countries.170 alongside the human and social factors essential for Despite a substantial reduction in disparities in the successful institutional transformations—tends to be earliest stages of education, serious inequalities per- overlooked. And context varies considerably. The ini- sist and grow in later stages and in learning outcomes tial conditions for AI deployment are highly unequal— (figure 6.8). and are becoming increasingly so in the areas closely In health there are sizeable differences across the linked to human agency and empowerment. If this re- globe. The gap in life expectancy at birth is 30 years: ality is not carefully considered, AI’s introduction may between 55 years in Nigeria and 85 years in Japan.171 prove ineffective or even counterproductive. Around half the world’s population lacks complete coverage of essential health services.172 And while gaps in mortality linked to communicable diseases A baseline of high inequality in enhanced have narrowed—leading to lower infant mortality— capabilities in education and health mortality disparities have increased at older ages. Lower-income countries are progressing much more The notable progress in education and health out- slowly in developing health systems with adequate comes over the past few decades has focused on basic coverage, resources and equity.173 Figure 6.8 Education—convergence in basic capabilities, divergence in enhanced capabilities Change in mean years of schooling, 2000–2015 Change in skills in literacy adjusted mean years of schooling, 2000–2015 1.8 1.8 1.60 1.6 1.6 1.54 1.48 1.44 1.4 1.4 1.31 1.27 1.2 1.09 1.2 1.0 1.0 0.8 0.8 0.73 0.6 0.6 0.4 0.4 0.2 0.2 0.0 0.0 Low HDI Medium HDI High HDI Very high HDI Note: Each bar measures the mean value for countries within each Human Development Index (HDI) group. Source: Human Development Report Office based on Lutz and others (2021). CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 179 Enhancing education capabilities Figure 6.9 Critical thinking mitigates students’ to seize AI’s potential propensity towards extreme trust or distrust of online content Seizing AI’s potential starts with shifting the focus in education from quantity to quality.174 AI may change cognition and the skills important to strive for.175 Low critical thinking High-quality learning requires the ability to under- stand the world, critically assess large amounts of in- Some critical formation, define objectives and apply knowledge in thinking an ever changing and complex environment. Three core areas need attention as AI diffuses: critical think- High critical thinking ing, creative thinking and relational thinking.176 Critical thinking is vital for evaluating large 0 5 10 15 20 amounts of information and making decisions that Propensity for extreme trust or align with one’s values and circumstances.177 For in- extreme distrust in online content (%) stance, extreme trust or distrust in online content signals an inability to properly assess and use inter- Note: Based on data for 52 countries. Extreme trust refers to re- spondents who answered “I strongly agree” with the statement “I net resources. Recent data from the Programme for trust what I read online,” and extreme distrust refers to respondents International Student Assessment show that 15-year- who answered “I strongly disagree” with the statement. Critical thinking is proxied using scoring groups (on a scale of 1–6) for math- old students with low critical thinking are more than ematics, reading and science, based on the qualitative descriptions three times as likely as those with high critical think- of achievement at each level. High critical thinking: level 4 or above in all three subjects. Some critical thinking: level 4 or above in at ing to indiscriminately accept or reject information least one subject Low critical thinking: below level 4 in all subjects. from online sources (figure 6.9). Source: Human Development Report Office calculations using data from the 2022 Programme for International Student Assessment. Creative thinking—the cognitive process that gen- erates, assesses and improves valuable and original In many resource-constrained settings even more ideas178—is essential for adapting to evolving circum- traditional technologies such as mobile phones can stances and setting new goals and priorities. Rela- enhance learning cost-effectively and equitably, as tional thinking is crucial for making decisions in a demonstrated by Kenya’s SMS-based M-Shule plat- context of interdependence—whether with the peo- form (chapter 3)183 and Botswana’s SMS and phone ple around us (empathy, compassion), our societies call intervention.184 Randomized controlled trials (responsibility, citizenship) or our planet (recognition in India, Kenya, Nepal, the Philippines and Ugan- of our embeddedness in nature).179 da demonstrate that phone call tutorials can scale effectively, offering targeted instruction that ca- Deploying AI to strengthen interventions ters to students’ learning needs.185 Another example that improve learning outcomes is intelligent tutoring systems, which can improve personalized learning, streamline classroom and ad- To enhance human learning, AI will have to be im- ministrative processes and promote collaborative, plemented to support learning strategies that are self-directed education186 while reducing costs and known to be effective180 rather than being deployed administrative burdens.187 Still, feedback options and in education for its own sake. Personalized and adap- expert supervision remain crucial.188 tive learning interventions are such strategies. For AI has the potential to greatly enhance the edu- example, adaptive learning technologies improve cation benefits made possible by these earlier tech- math achievement,181 and the benefits of interven- nologies. In Sierra Leone, where high internet costs tions such as structured pedagogy and “teaching result in low connectivity, AI-driven solutions offer at the right level”—as opposed to teaching in ac- a cost-effective alternative that is 87 percent cheaper cordance with age cohort—are 65 times their cost than a web search.189 For AI-powered tutoring target- when applied at scale in low- and middle-income ed instruction and personalization have proven effec- countries.182 tive in improving learning outcomes in Ghana190 and 180 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Nigeria.191 Instruments need to be customized: tar- effective in preventing or reducing internet addic- geting instruction to students’ learning levels rather tion. Interventions that shift children’s focus from than simply to their grade, significantly improves ed- online activities to real-world activities have shown ucation outcomes. For example, a targeted pedagogi- promise in reducing internet engagement, prevent- cal intervention in Türkiye, achieved through teacher ing addictive behaviours.199 training, boosted children’s curiosity, knowledge re- tention and learning outcomes.192 AI on its own will not fix education challenges AI in education can also address challenges such as cyberbullying, where general empathy training, Technology-driven interventions do not always yield modifying beliefs supportive of aggression and more positive results. Interventions that only add an ad- specific guidelines for internet behaviour are re- ditional input (such as a computer) to the education quired.193 It can support learners with disabilities194 process are consistently ineffective. In Costa Rica and create opportunities for women195 by helping and Peru there were no notable impacts on academ- them upskill, reskill and increase participation in ic achievement or cognitive skills from providing underrepresented science, technology, engineering laptops to children at home.200 Even access to funda- and math fields.196 mental services such as electricity might not have a AI deployment can be informed by how technology noticeable effect if not accompanied by complemen- can support parental engagement.197 Telementoring tary measures.201 and homeschooling in Bangladesh during the Covid- Despite the promise of AI in education, use of digital 19 pandemic boosted students’ test scores by 35 per- devices has not improved student outcomes across the cent, increased mothers’ involvement by 26 percent, board,202 sparking dissatisfaction and, in some cases, prevented learning loss and had lasting benefits, es- protests among students and teacher unions.203 While pecially for lower-performing students.198 Parenting digital resources can yield positive effects for learning, strategies—along with children’s education, strate- the benefits diminish with excessive use (figure 6.10). gic physical activity and counselling—have proven Data from the 2022 Programme for International Figure 6.10 The benefits of digital resources for learning critical thinking diminish with excessive use Medium HDI High HDI Very high HDI Percentage of students (%) Percentage of students (%) Percentage of students (%) 35 35 35 30 30 30 25 25 25 20 20 20 15 15 15 10 10 10 5 5 5 0 0 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Hours of digital for Hours of digital for Hours of digital for learning at school learning at school learning at school HDI is Human Development Index. Note: Pooled observations with equal weights across countries. Critical thinking is proxied using scoring groups (on a scale of 1–6) for mathematics, reading and science, based on the qualitative descriptions of achievement at each level. For each group the bars show the percentage of students who reached level 4 or above in at least one subject. Source: Human Development Report Office calculations using data from the 2022 Programme for International Student Assessment. CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 181 Student Assessment show declining reading and math programmes can be incorporated into school cur- scores in OECD countries, with excessive mobile phone ricula, with self-monitoring tools and behavioural use for leisure correlated with poorer outcomes.204 interventions such as video modelling and group con- Gains from using digital technologies in educa- tingencies.216 Schools can also raise awareness about tion at school are greater in higher HDI countries. In the addictive nature of digital experiences and pro- medium HDI countries increasing digital resources mote responsible online behaviour.217 in schools tends to be less effective on average. One Overreliance on generative AI can hinder student study shows Indonesia, at the lower end of high HDI motivation and intellectual engagement,218 while weak countries, could benefit from integrating large lan- pedagogical designs can minimally improve learning guage models into education to reduce educators’ outcomes (chapter 3).219 Metareviews of intelligent tu- workload and support interactive, personalized learn- toring systems show modest learning gains,220 with ef- ing, though issues related to ethics, data privacy, re- fectiveness influenced by students’ prior knowledge.221 liability, accuracy and cost persist.205 AI in education Although AI can create personalized learning experi- risks exacerbating inequities due to unequal access to ences,222 both humans and AI need to adapt to ensure digital connectivity and technology.206 Without prop- successful integration of technology in education.223 er governance and targeted policies, issues related to In teaching maintaining social cues such as gestures, accessibility, transparency and fairness in AI-based facial expressions and eye gaze remains crucial.224 systems may lead to discrimination and exclusion,207 Adopting educational technologies without consider- further entrenching existing disparities and raising ing the context brings challenges such as high costs, concerns about environmental impacts.208 teacher shortages225 and concerns over AI’s inability to replicate the social, emotional and cognitive roles of “S uccessfully integrating AI into education educators226 and overreliance on technology.227 requires effective classroom practices, teacher collaboration and attention to local education goals, with human interaction playing a crucial role in AI can enhance health outcomes if shaping student perceptions and learning outcomes health inequalities are redressed Successfully integrating AI into education thus re- AI offers multiple opportunities to personalize, ex- quires effective classroom practices,209 teacher col- pand access to and increase the quality of healthcare laboration and attention to local education goals, by predicting,228 diagnosing229 and managing diseas- with human interaction playing a crucial role in shap- es230 while supporting clinical decisionmaking and ing learning outcomes.210 AI’s potential suggests that medical workflows.231 It can improve patient care, a combination of institutional and human capabili- quality assurance and overall healthcare operations, ties is needed to improve education outcomes. Even leading to better health outcomes.232 when technologies such as video lectures are used, Use cases of AI in healthcare already abound.233 AI an instructor’s online presence increases student mo- enhances disease detection, classification and mon- tivation and engagement.211 Blended learning, com- itoring through machine learning models in health bining online and face-to-face instruction, also shows systems.234 With noncommunicable diseases account- benefits.212 Teachers’ characteristics, self-efficacy and ing for the majority of global mortality and morbidi- alignment with student needs are crucial in technolo- ty, AI-driven tools can help address the rising burden gy integration, as are supportive school environments of chronic conditions such as heart disease, diabetes and infrastructure.213 and respiratory illnesses.235 AI can generate high-qual- Given challenges with plagiarism, bias and over- ity data and support systematic reviews to better un- reliance, careful attention must be paid to the design derstand the links among diet, nutrition and chronic and implementation of generative AI in education,214 diseases.236 By providing personalized medical infor- while maintaining opportunities to enhance learn- mation, lifestyle guidance and treatment details,237 ing through content generation, personalized tu- AI-driven tools can empower people to manage toring and instructional support.215 Digital literacy noncommunicable diseases. Mobile apps, reminder 182 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 systems and AI chatbots enhance communication with Gender inequities in healthcare and AI develop- physicians and may improve treatment adherence.238 ment further reinforce disparities. Despite mak- The promise of AI-enhanced healthcare in low- ing up 67 percent of the global health workforce,254 income settings with limited access to specialized ex- women hold only 31 percent of global health lead- pertise is especially important.239 For example, AI can ership roles,255 limiting their influence on AI-driven help community health workers screen for severe dis- healthcare. The lack of gender diversity in AI devel- eases, such as breast cancer,240 or detect leukaemia opment teams exacerbates this issue, resulting in with just 10 laboratory parameters,241 enabling early lower-quality AI products that reinforce stereotypes detection in low-resource and emergency settings.242 and discrimination.256 In addition, gender biases in In countries with high neonatal mortality rates, such as patient care and limited access to digital health tools India, Nigeria and Pakistan, AI can assist mothers with disproportionately affect women, particularly those early screening and diagnosis of noncommunicable with less education and income.257 Addressing these and nutrition-related diseases.243 Innovative solutions, disparities requires promoting women’s leadership in such as voice bots in Bangladesh, show how AI can AI, expanding education in science, technology, engi- support women’s healthcare needs.244 Further, pre- neering and math, eliminating hiring biases and fos- dictive analytics enable real-time surveillance of in- tering inclusive workplace practices.258 fectious outbreaks using genomic, environmental and patient data.245 “M any people lack the skills to use AI tools, even ones that are affordable. Mobile health No AI in health without trust, less trust apps, wearables and telemedicine are often out without redressing health inequities. of reach for historically excluded communities Much of AI’s potential is hampered because con- Many people lack the skills to use AI tools, even ones cerns about bias, trust and privacy hinder AI adoption that are affordable. Mobile health apps, wearables in health.246 Limited health infrastructure, skewed and telemedicine are often out of reach for historical- datasets and algorithmic flaws can deepen healthcare ly excluded communities. Limited digital literacy and disparities, while lack of transparency and govern- poor access to devices or the internet remain, even in ance gaps erode trust. For example, the integration of high-income countries.259 Disparities are also linked large language models into Philippine ophthalmology to AI healthcare research is being concentrated in a shows great potential but is hindered by challenges few high-income countries.260 Research output is also such as limited local data, technical expertise, fund- uneven: in Africa, Egypt, Morocco and South Africa ing and regulatory oversight.247 lead in cardiovascular, diabetes and cancer research, Even before AI, telemedicine and mobile health while Egypt, Ghana, Nigeria and South Africa focus expanded access to healthcare, but adoption was on malaria and tuberculosis.261 Even in high-income often hindered by technological gaps and resource countries, access to healthcare data varies widely. As limitations.248 Now, AI-driven telemedicine could data capacity increases, the gap in countries’ abili- improve care for elderly populations in remote areas, ty to make informed health decisions is expected to though unequal access to healthcare data can worsen grow.262AI in healthcare requires supportive policies, disparities, even in high-income countries.249 Thus, executive backing, clinical demand and user consen- the digital divide and healthcare workforce short- sus.263 Strengthening social protection systems and ages reinforce healthcare inequities,250 particularly involving the community in design and implementa- for low-income populations, who are often excluded tion can ensure more equitable outcomes.264 from data collection and receive lower-quality care.251 Weak health infrastructure further limits diverse AI AI deployment in health requires building trust development.252 To close these gaps, ensuring that and ensuring both accuracy and fairness AI-driven healthcare tools are accessible, affordable and effectively integrated into diverse settings can As AI’s clinical significance grows,265 better in- help reduce rather than deepen disparities.253 tegration into clinical practice and workforce CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 183 development is essential. One randomized con- audits,279 federated learning, disentanglement tech- trolled trial found that while large language mod- niques and explainable AI would further enhance els outperformed physicians in diagnostics, they fairness and accountability.280 offered no significant benefit as a diagnostic aid.266 Addressing individual and systemic concerns Similarly, using large language model technology builds trust in the use of technology in healthcare. to draft responses to electronic health record mes- Ensuring compliance with ethical standards, robust sages can reduce messaging burdens on healthcare data management and continuous monitoring of AI teams but will remain a supportive aid rather than a systems fosters confidence. The competence of dig- comprehensive solution.267 AI use was also found to ital management, as demonstrated, for example, be associated with higher risk of radiologist burn- by Mexico’s local governments, also influences AI out, particularly among those with high workload or perceptions.281 lower AI acceptance.268 Healthcare organizations must ensure the safe, AI in healthcare relies on large datasets and com- transparent integration of AI technologies. Col- plex algorithms, which can introduce biases and laboration to cocreate AI solutions that meet re- inaccuracies that undermine its effectiveness, par- al-world needs, align with social values and avoid ticularly for disadvantaged populations.269 Inad- bias fosters public trust. Institutions should prior- equate clinical validation and weak evaluation itize testing, validation, training and continuous frameworks hinder AI’s safe and effective use in monitoring of AI applications in clinical settings.282 patient care.270 For example, AI’s potential in brain They also have a responsibility to educate the pub- tumour or melanoma diagnosis depends on data lic on AI’s strengths and limitations while ensuring quality, but the underrepresentation of certain pop- accessibility and affordability. Clear explanations ulations271 can reduce its accuracy.272 Addressing of AI’s decisionmaking processes can enhance con- healthcare inequities requires unbiased data and fidence.283 Transparency through patient notifica- overcoming biases in clinical practices and AI use.273 tion is crucial for maintaining the trustworthiness Technologies such as pulse oximeters, which overes- of health systems.284 The credibility of AI profes- timate oxygen levels in nonwhite patients, can per- sionals also influences public trust,285 highlighting petuate disparities.274 the need for third-party accreditation, regulatory guidance and AI-specific training for healthcare “E nsuring transparency in AI-driven decisions workers.286 through rigorous evaluation of clinical benefits At the individual level perceived utility and ease and compliance with methodological standards of use of AI and digital tools in healthcare can foster can prevent biases in clinical workflows trust.287 Patient attitudes towards AI are influenced by cultural, age and education factors, affecting adop- A multistage approach focusing on fairness, trans- tion and engagement.288 For example, while African parency and inclusivity can address biases in AI-driv- American and Latin American women in general em- en healthcare. For example, only 8 of 27 countries brace digital health for perinatal mental health,289 actively use AI for data mining in healthcare, ex- some demographics, such as older women in Chile, posing regional biases.275 Inclusive data sharing, prefer in-person care for certain procedures.290 In this participant-centred development and code transpar- sense AI systems in healthcare should be personal- ency could mitigate this.276 Ensuring transparency in ized and patient centred, considering accessibility, AI-driven decisions through rigorous evaluation of family involvement and reminders. Trust between clinical benefits and compliance with methodological healthcare providers and patients, built on commu- standards can prevent biases in clinical workflows.277 nication and competence, remains essential.291 AI At various stages specific interventions can ad- should enhance, not replace, human interactions, dress systemic biases during data collection, handle improving access, quality and adherence while ad- missing data during preparation and reduce model dressing power dynamics and patient-provider selection bias during development.278 Algorithmic relationships. 184 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 The road ahead: AI’s promise to The effectiveness of AI-supported transformation advance human development depends heavily on a country’s human development, economic and institutional context (figure 6.11). As seen throughout this Report, AI holds consider- Many countries face compounded challenges. In low able promise for enhancing human development. HDI countries less than 1 student in 20 has the basic Micro- and macro-level evidence points to the po- skills to critically engage with new technologies, lim- tential of AI-driving improvements in individual iting AI’s potential to enhance learning and eventu- and aggregate learning outcomes, in public health ally stifling possibilities for leveraging AI in work. and personalized medicine and in increasing work- Institutional capacity to integrate AI into public ser- ers’ productivity. Yet without proper attention to vice delivery is also limited in many of these coun- context, today’s development gaps can be substan- tries, as reflected in low scores on the Government tial barriers. Where institutions are underresourced, AI Index.294 At the same time, the economic struc- technical fixes are unlikely to yield positive results tures in many of these countries may limit the local and may, in some cases, lead to unintended or even economy’s potential to absorb productivity spillovers harmful consequences.292 from AI. The economic complexity of many low and Development is path dependent. Countries up- medium HDI countries is limited,295 reflecting a rel- grade and diversify their productive structures by ative lack of diversity of the economy and fewer and building on what exists at each time.293 weaker links to high-value-added activities. In many Figure 6.11 Mind the context—initial conditions can compound development challenges Human Development Economic Index value (2023) complexity 0.900 0.800 0.700 0.600 0.500 Artificial intelligence Students with government preparedness basic skills Source: Human Development Report Office based on data on economic complexity (defined as diversity and complexity of a country’s export basket) from Harvard Growth Lab (2025), data on the Government AI Index from Oxford Insights (2024) and data on the share of students with basic skills in mathematics and science from Gust, Hanushek and Woessmann (2024a). CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 185 of these countries, exports are concentrated in a few realities of each country and centred around the three commodities296—often those with low labour intensi- areas of action proposed in this chapter: ty, such as mining and certain types of agriculture— Pursuing a complementarity economy implies or in activities such as call centres, which are difficult strengthening the networks that facilitate produc- to upgrade. Addressing these gaps is key to moving tive interaction between people and AI. This begins towards AI-augmented human development. Action by empowering workers with augmentation oppor- in all three areas –a complementarity economy, inno- tunities. Countries have several policy levers at hand. vation with intent and capabilities that count, would First, advance a broad macro-fiscal package that help. shapes incentives towards investment in labour-en- AI implementation should be properly nested in hancing AI and addresses existing development gaps. the local reality. It is important, particularly in low- Universal and meaningful connectivity as a founda- and middle-income countries, to avoid “vanity” AI tional enabler for AI-driven progress is key (spotlight projects that have few links to the prevailing patterns 6.2). Second, include workers in AI gains and govern- of specialization and expertise in a country. This does ance through social dialogue, ensuring that AI-driven not mean giving up from the supply side of AI but structural transformations deliver decent jobs. Third, rather seizing the opportunities of the wide availabili- strengthen social protection systems and active la- ty and customizability of generative AI while building bour market policies, including through private sec- native AI to the extent of each country’s capabilities tor collaborations, that support those whose jobs may that seizes on the country’s distinctive economic and be displaced, link them to new productive opportuni- cultural characteristics—not developing AI for AI’s ties and increase the supply of skilled workers. sake. In innovation with intent, harness the potential of AI to be the invention of a method of invention, giving “R ealizing the potential of AI for human new wings to humans’ perennial aspirations to un- development demands policy action that is derstand and create. It also means embedding new grounded in the human development realities directions into AI research and development—em- of each country and centred around the three powering users through creative engagement, ex- areas of action: pursuing a complementary panding AI safety, augmenting human capabilities economy, driving innovation with intent through small language models and cautiously devel- and Investing in capabilities that count oping open source AI—can anchor human agency in the research and development process. This ensures From there countries can leverage AI to deepen that AI development is recalibrated to drive positive their competitiveness and diversify their economies. human development outcomes. Additionally, supple- AI has spillovers across different areas, and AI in- menting technical benchmarks with new standards vestment in one sector can spill over to other sectors that assess AI’s contribution to human development of the economy. For instance, in Nigeria, which like is essential. Establishing a multistakeholder coali- many other resource-rich countries faces perennial tion to design and promote these benchmarks would challenges with diversification, strong AI investment ensure that AI innovations are measured not just by in money, personal finance and business manage- technical standards but by their capacity to advance ment services could offer pathways towards diversifi- human development. cation.297 Leveraging AI for economic diversification When it comes to capabilities that count, seize AI’s may be particularly important in lower-income econ- opportunities to personalize education and medicine, omies,298 as traditional export- and manufactur- expand access and adapt technology-enhanced ser- ing-led growth strategies become less attainable.299 vice delivery to different local realities across groups Realizing the potential of AI for human develop- and development contexts. For health, AI can com- ment requires us to move beyond unhelpful fatalis- plement scarce healthcare expertise, especially in re- tic or overly optimistic narratives. It demands policy source-constrained settings. Avoid deploying AI for action that is grounded in the human development AI’s sake and instead use it to enhance and scale up interventions in education and health that are known 186 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 to work. Ultimately, realizing AI’s potential to advance health, in their work, is essential. Rather than per- human development hinges on investment in people, ceiving AI as an all-knowing authority that replaces not in algorithms alone. For example, moving away human decisionmaking, people should be equipped from a focus on education quantity to a stronger em- to use it as a tool for exploration, learning and crea- phasis on quality and lifelong learning will be essen- tivity. Encouraging an iterative approach—where AI tial in equipping people to thrive in an AI-augmented supports problem-solving and enhances human ca- world. AI can support such a shift, under certain con- pabilities—can foster confidence and innovation, ditions, by providing personalized learning pathways, ensuring that AI is seen as a complement to human identifying gaps in understanding and offering tailored intelligence.300 support for students. Broader education reforms can As AI continues to race ahead, policymakers, busi- also prioritize critical, creative and systemic thinking. nesses and people are trying to keep pace. However, Rather than striving to make AI “better than humans” seizing the opportunities of this new era demands at various tasks, this approach would help students see more than technological innovation. An AI-aug- AI as a companion—as an enabler that helps people mented human development framework offers a achieve their goals more effectively and efficiently— way forward that is dynamic and can adapt to rapid rather than as a replacement for human skills. technological change while being grounded enough Strengthening AI skills and empowering individ- to ensure that AI advances translate into meaningful uals to engage confidently with AI, in education, in improvements in people’s lives. CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 187 SPOTLIGHT 6.1 The promise and peril of leveraging artificial intelligence to address dangerous planetary change Although humanity’s technological innovations since whereby global warming and climate destabilization the Industrial Revolution are the primary sources of would happen more rapidly following mass combus- Earth-warming emissions fuelling the current cli- tion of fossil fuels. Had we been faced with the cur- mate crisis, scientific breakthroughs have also pro- rent climate crises, say, 150 years ago, we would have vided us with the necessary technological tools to lacked the scientific knowledge, international politi- perceive, predict and prescribe solutions to the prob- cal apparatuses and technologies needed to solve the lem. Computing performance has evolved at rough- problem on a global scale. However, simply having ly the same pace as warming temperatures in recent the technological and institutional capacity to solve decades, representing a sort of arms race between the issue does not guarantee its solution, as the inad- planetary warming and the capacity for solution-ori- equacy of the current global response has revealed. ented research and innovation (figure S6.1.1). Although substantial progress has been made to One can imagine a hypothetical planet whose at- curb global emissions in recent years, we have fallen mosphere is more sensitive to the greenhouse effect, short of the ambitious Paris Agreement goals to limit Figure S6.1.1 Computing performance has evolved at roughly the same pace as warming temperatures in recent decades °C 1.50 Change in global mean surface temperature relative to 1850–1900 average (left axis) Transistors per microprocessor (number) 1010 Supercomputer computational capacity (floating point per operations per second) 1.25 108 108 1.00 106 106 0.75 104 104 0.50 0.25 102 0.00 –0.25 1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 2020 Source: Data on global mean surface temperature for 1850–1900 from Morice and others (2021), data on transistors per microprocessor from Rupp (2022) and data on supercomputer computation capacity from Dongarra, Luszczek and Petitet (2003). 188 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 warming to less than 1.5°C relative to the preindustri- energy generation for both increased reliability and al baseline,1 with the increase in global mean temper- reduced emissions.9 ature surpassing this threshold in 2024.2 In the transportation sector, which accounts for ap- Concerted efforts must be made to innovate and proximately 25 percent of global emissions, AI helps deploy technological solutions that leverage the reduce greenhouse gas emissions through sustaina- groundbreaking progress in artificial intelligence (AI) ble vehicle design,10 cleaner materials11 and improved and machine learning, along with comprehensive construction of roads and related infrastructure.12 It public policies and collective action to mitigate emis- can also help identify optimal policies for reducing sions and enable resilient adaptation. transportation emissions sectorwide.13 Additional- ly, the abundance of fine-grain, anonymized travel- ler data from Global Positioning System–based apps The promise of deploying AI in the Anthropocene allows planners to address regional challenges more precisely and better craft sustainable projects and In the electricity sector AI has proven a potent tool policy.14 The design of low-emissions vehicles, such for predicting energy markets, reducing operation- as hybrid-electric and full-electric cars, has also been al costs and optimizing grid operations. AI has been turbocharged by novel AI applications, as in the dis- used to reduce uncertainty in renewable energy pro- covery of battery materials15 and greater vehicle duction for a given location by, for example, devel- range, longevity, safety and fuel efficiency. Autono- oping real-time, precise forecasts of cloud cover, mous vehicles extensively leverage AI algorithms and identifying dangerous gusts or flocks of birds near sensors for safe self-navigation16 and design innova- wind turbines and improving siting and operation- tion. Electric vehicles and autonomous vehicles can al decisions for hydro, geothermal and tidal plants.3 also serve as a unique source of clean power to sup- Better modelling capabilities using AI have also ac- plement the grid while they are plugged in. AI helps celerated innovation, leading to safer nuclear fission optimize how vehicle owners can satisfy their charg- plants and facilitating breakthroughs in research to ing needs while supplying a distributed source of en- harness nuclear fusion.4 ergy to supplement the grid, improving grid resilience In addition to improving non–fossil fuel energy and potentially reducing net emissions.17 production, AI can enable efficiency gains and emis- AI can also facilitate large reductions in building sions reductions from traditional, fossil fuel–based emissions, aiding in the design of energy-efficient sources. Advanced aerial and satellite-based imag- construction materials,18 enhancing local energy de- ing and chemical detection platforms can be paired mand prediction and improving metering to reduce with AI modelling to pinpoint fugitive emissions from waste.19 Cities have employed AI to predict build- power plants and pipelines. One such example is the ing-scale ratings to target efficiency improvements.20 MethaneSAT satellite platform, launched in 2024 to “District” heating and cooling networks across neigh- hunt for leaking methane—a potent greenhouse gas— bouring buildings can offer considerable efficiency from conveyance infrastructure and nonpoint emis- gains through economies of scale and have leveraged sions such as agricultural fields.5 AI models can also AI to optimize resource management.21 improve real-time diagnostics for identifying hazards In manufacturing and distribution AI has helped and system malfunctions to guide preventative main- optimize shipping routes to increase delivery speeds tenance and achieve efficiency gains through the en- and reduce emissions.22 AI promises to drastically tire electricity grid. This might entail using AI-driven cut manufacturing emissions by accelerating dis- image analysis and weather modelling to identify pre- covery of cleaner manufacturing input materials,23 cise times and locations of high wildfire risk around optimizing inventory management24 and aiding in power lines,6 optimizing home energy consumption three-dimensional printing of lighter manufactur- to favour renewable sources.7 AI can also automate ing components located closer to demand centres.25 the control of distributed, decentralized and micro- The broad application of three-dimensional printing grid energy systems to improve grid resilience and in manufacturing could reduce global total energy energy access in remote areas8 or optimize grid-scale demand by as much as 27 percent by 2050.26 More CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 189 accurately predicting variation in markets could en- granularity of ecosystem monitoring, species detec- able more precise production, reducing surplus and tion and migration tracking and have even helped greenhouse gas footprints.27 In food shipping, deliv- identify illegal poaching.54 ery and storage novel algorithms28 have been used to AI classification tools have improved the identifi- estimate demand and more accurately predict spoil- cation of specific individuals based on morphologi- age, reducing net emissions.29 cal characteristics, such as patterns on whale flukes55 In commercial agriculture AI has improved sus- and primate faces.56 Algorithms based on animals’ tainable tillage practices, precision irrigation, agro- audio signatures have allowed for the identification chemical application, fertilizer synthesis from thin of a habitat’s species diversity57 and the presence and air30 and estimation of soil nutrients and crop needs.31 abundance of migratory birds, as well as for the deci- It has enabled the design of autonomous farm vehi- phering of species’ linguistic patterns.58 In 2023 sci- cles for more efficient application of inputs32 and, entists claimed to have successfully conversed with when applied to remotely-sensed imagery, has en- an Alaskan humpback whale for 20 minutes,59 and in abled finer-scale predictions of crop-water stress,33 2024 researchers decoded a “phonetic alphabet” used yields34 and land-based greenhouse gas emissions,35 by sperm whales.60 And one AI-powered phone-based which could help reduce global emissions from the app identifies mosquito species based on the buzz of agricultural industry. their wings, alerting the user to the presence of poten- Managing ecosystems sustainably can also use new tial disease carriers.61 Supervised learning algorithms AI tools, which have enhanced the ability to quan- have greatly improved the predictive accuracy of taxo- tify natural carbon stocks,36 improved accuracy in nomic habitat assessments when combined with “en- carbon offset markets and closed the balance of the vironmental DNA” sampling methods, whereby the carbon cycle.37 Advanced computer vision improves biological composition of a given habitat is estimat- assessments of impacts from natural hazards such ed based on fragments of genetic material collected as floods, droughts, severe storms and fires,38 allow- from field samples.62 Researchers have even deployed ing for better planning and resilient adaptation. It has small aerial drones equipped with AI-backed sensors also proven effective at tracking human-influenced to glean relevant genetic, hormonal and water quality impacts to the environment, such as deforestation data simply by collecting mucus from the spray emit- and desertification.39 Using AI helps approximate the ted by breaching humpback whales.63 global greenhouse gas budget, especially from uncer- tain processes such as thawing arctic permafrost,40 decomposing peatlands41 and ice sheet melting,42 im- The peril of overreliance on technological solutions proving the accuracy, as well as the computational ef- ficiency, of global climate models.43 While we should embrace all the innovative appli- New AI algorithms have also catalysed numerous cations of AI to curb global emissions, improve our breakthroughs in biodiversity monitoring and wild- scientific models and adapt to evolving hazards, we life biology by revolutionizing the ability to man- must not stake all our ambitions for tackling climate age, detect, monitor and even interact with animal change on technological solutions alone. The expo- life.44 Applied to satellite imagery, classification al- nential growth in computing power, climate science gorithms have enabled more accurate classification and innovation of sustainable technology in recent of land cover,45 habitat loss46 and assessment of spe- decades has given us the necessary ingredients to cies richness, extent and abundance.47 They have curb emissions and adapt effectively, but the collec- also enabled more accurate monitoring of changes to tive political will needed to implement these solu- critical ecosystems,48 the spread of invasive species49 tions at scale is lacking. Simply investing in faster and even the presence of large animals, such as ele- computer models and technological development phants50 and whales,51 from space. Using ground-lev- will not solve the problem on its own; political action el images, such as those from wildlife cameras52 or must be implemented in tandem. phone-based, citizen science applications,53 novel AI One of the biggest risks of deploying technology applications have improved the spatial and temporal aimed at improving energy efficiency and resource 190 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 consumption without proper oversight is the poten- For biodiversity and ecological monitoring the ap- tial for rebound effects (that is, Jevon’s Paradox).64 peal of new technologies risks diverting attention and Cost savings from more efficient—and marginal- limited funding away from traditional field-based ly cheaper—transportation, agriculture or energy research methods and community-oriented partici- use can increase overall consumption (miles driv- patory stewardship initiatives78 and reducing direct en- en, goods produced, energy consumed and the gagement with local stakeholders in favour of remote, like). Evidence from dozens of studies suggests that automated data collection.79 Although AI is expand- economywide rebound effects following energy effi- ing the boundaries of ecological monitoring, enabling ciency gains exceed 50 percent, on average.65 In other new research on understudied small, rare and seclud- words, striving to improve efficiency alone, without ed biota,80 the models ultimately remain limited by monitoring its impacts on overall emissions, may not the availability of observational data for training, in- be sufficient. herently skewing their focus towards regions, habitat Rebound effects have emerged in AI as well, with types and species where such data are abundant. recent computing efficiency breakthroughs for ad- vanced large language models offering equivalent performance at a fraction of the prior cost and ener- Pairing AI climate technology gy use.66 But market trends suggest that this will sim- with sound public policy ply boost demand for processing chips and pave the way for bigger, more complex large language mod- As pressures on the global climate and ecological els, in turn mitigating the marginal energy savings.67 wellbeing grow in each passing year, effective solu- The technology sector currently accounts for 2–3 tions to reduce global greenhouse gas emissions, percent of global energy demand,68 roughly on par adapt to hazards and conserve sensitive ecosystems with the global airline industry, but as AI computing are imminently needed. Breakthroughs in intelli- grows exponentially, so do the greenhouse gas foot- gent computing have granted us important tools to prints of major companies.69 The computational de- conceptualize these crises on a planetary scale and mand to fuel AI growth is estimated to double every will continue to provide critical innovations towards 100 days,70 due primarily to the increased energy de- achieving a sustainable and resilient future. But mes- mand of data centres; the global energy demand for sianic faith and investment in novel technologies these centres is forecast to increase by 160 percent in alone will not solve the problem. AI in the climate the next five years.71 Water used to cool data centre and environmental space will enhance human devel- servers has also increased dramatically and, in some opment and environmental wellbeing only if used in cases, led to local water disputes.72 conjunction with broader social policies. In climate resilience and adaptation AI tools have In short, we must want to solve these problems rath- proven immensely helpful in targeting aid,73 stream- er than simply innovating new ways to measure them lining data integration74 and enabling real-time and or inventing new products and market efficiencies that rapid assessments of impacts and humanitarian are meant—but not guaranteed—to be solutions. If needs from extreme events.75 But staking too much used well, new technologies can be an ace up our sleeve faith on estimates provided by these tools, especially in the fight to safeguard our global environment. If not, if used in lieu of field-based community assessments they risk serving as false prophets, increasing the fidel- of socioeconomic and physical dynamics, can perpet- ity with which we watch planetary pressures progress uate bias in reporting and measurement, exacerbate but ultimately diverting attention away from real solu- existing inequalities and compromise individuals’ tions—or even making problems worse. The way in privacy.76 Social protection programmes for vulnera- which new technology will shape our world is not pre- ble communities facing acute climate hazards should ordained. As with the impacts of climate change, the be expanded, using appropriate new technologies. impacts of revolutionary new technologies need not However, such programmes should continue to be represent an inevitable wave of disruption over which human-centred, with complementary digital tools we bear no control. Collectively, we have the agency to used equitably, transparently and sustainably.77 shape our technology and, ultimately, our planet. CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 191 NOTES 1. Allen and others 2018. 39. Boali and others 2024; Mayfield and others 2017; Raihan 2023. 2. WMO 2025. 40. Ni and others 2021. 3. Rolnick and others 2022. 41. Siewert 2018. 4. Aitken and others 2018; Seo and others 2024. 42. de Roda Husman and others 2024. 5. Chan Miller and others 2024. 43. Schneider and others 2023. 6. Rhizome 2023; Kim 2023. 44. Reynolds and others 2025; Silvestro and others 2022; Tuia and others 2022. 7. Choi and others 2024; Wolfe 2024. 45. Helber and others 2019; Praticò and others 2021; Rolf and others 2021. 8. Ali and Choi 2020; Lee and Callaway 2018. 46. da Silveira and others 2021. 9. Nagapurkar and Smith 2019; Sabzehgar, Amirhosseini and Rasouli 2020; Strezoski and others 2022. 47. Muro and others 2022; Sun and others 2019. 10. Rolnick and others 2022. 48. Cavender-Bares, Gamon and Townsend 2020; da Silveira and others 2021. 11. Madhavaram and others 2024; Pittro and others 2024. 49. Jensen and others 2020; Shiferaw, Bewket and Eckert 2019. 12. Arifuzzaman and others 2021; Kuenzel and others 2016. 50. Duporge and others 2021. 13. Abduljabbar and others 2019; Li, Ren and Li 2022. 51. Cubaynes and Fretwell 2022. 14. Google Research 2025; Rollend and others 2023; Schewel and others 52. Green and others 2020. 2021. 53. McClure and others 2020. 15. Ansari and others 2018; IBM 2021; Samuthira Pandian and others 2020. 54. Bondi and others 2018; Kamminga and others 2018. 16. Corso and others 2021; Garikapati and Shetiya 2024. 55. Blount and others 2022; Khan and others 2022a. 17. Munusamy and Vairavasundaram 2024; Pratap Singh and others 2024. 56. Guo and others 2020. 18. X. Wang and others 2023. 57. Kahl and others 2021. 19. Knayer and Kryvinska 2022; Kwon, Lee and Kim 2022;. 58. Andreas and others 2022; Kelling and others 2012. 20. Jamali, Dascalu and Harris 2024; Pham and others 2020; Tien and others 59. McCowan and others 2023. 2022. 60. Sharma and others 2024. 21. Zhou, Zheng and Hensen 2024. 61. Sinka and others 2021. 22. Durlik and others 2024; Riyadh 2024; Xiao and others 2024. 62. Cordier and others 2017; Cordier and others 2018; Fan and others 2020; 23. Chitturi and others 2024; Merchant and others 2023; Szymanski and oth- Pawlowski and others 2021. ers 2023; Materials Project 2024. 63. Keller and Willke 2019. 24. Plathottam and others 2023. 64. Alcott 2005. 25. Verhoef and others 2018. 65. Brockway and others 2021; Grepperud and Rasmussen 2004; Hanley and 26. Verhoef and others 2018. others 2009; Mashhadi Rajabi 2022. 27. Ameh 2024; Dauvergne 2022. 66. Guo and others 2024. 28. Pannone and others 2024. 67. Luccioni, Strubell and Crawford 2025; Salmon 2025. 29. Sonwani and others 2022. 68. Kemene, Valkhof and Greene-Dewasmes 2024. 30. Song and others 2024. 69. Kemene, Valkhof and Greene-Dewasmes 2024. 31. Ennaji, Vergütz and El Allali 2023; Magesh 2025; Tanaka and others 2024. 70. Kemene, Valkhof and Greene-Dewasmes 2024. 32. Bergerman and others 2015; Ghobadpour and others 2019; Ghobadpour 71. Goldman Sachs 2024. and others 2022. 72. Berreby 2024. 33. Chandel and others 2021; Kapari and others 2024; Virnodkar and others 2020. 73. Aiken and others 2022. 34. Goel and Pandey 2024; Malashin and others 2024; Paudel and others 2021. 74. De Neubourg and others 2025. 35. Hamrani, Akbarzadeh and Madramootoo 2020; SaberiKamarposhti and 75. De Neubourg and others 2025. others 2024. 76. De Neubourg and others 2025. 36. Pham and others 2021; Shivaprakash and others 2022; Szatmári, Pásztor 77. De Neubourg and others 2025. and Heuvelink 2021. 78. Reynolds and others 2025. 37. Liu and others 2024b; Xiao and others 2019. 79. Reynolds and others 2025. 38. Eini and others 2020; Jain and others 2020; Javidan and others 2021; Park and others 2016; Prodhan and others 2022. 80. Mou and others 2023; Reckling and others 2021; van Klink and others 2022. 192 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 SPOTLIGHT 6.2 Universal and meaningful connectivity and artificial intelligence International Telecommunication Union In 1990, when the first Human Development Report world, nor can it support the demands of emerging was released, the world counted just 11 million mo- technologies such as artificial intelligence (AI). bile phone subscriptions. These devices were limit- AI systems rely on vast amounts of data and com- ed to basic calls and text messaging, and the world putational resources, both of which are intrinsi- wide web—the internet, as we know it—did not exist. cally linked to connectivity. High-speed internet is Today, around two-thirds of the global population essential for transferring and processing the exten- uses the internet, and there is almost one mobile sive datasets that AI models require for training and broadband subscription per person worldwide.1 De- operation. Moreover, advanced AI applications, such spite this progress, considerable gaps persist. as natural language processing, image recognition An estimated 96 percent of the world is covered and predictive analytics, depend on cloud computing by a mobile broadband network enabling access to infrastructure, which itself relies on high-quality, reli- the internet. But an estimated 32 percent of people able connectivity. do not use the internet, and among those connected, Beyond development, connectivity underpins the many experience only basic forms of connectivity, practical deployment of AI in ways that can enhance with limited speeds and functionality. In least devel- lives. Telemedicine platforms use AI to diagnose oped countries two-thirds of the population has never illnesses remotely, requiring secure and robust con- used the internet, and millions remain unaware of its nections to transmit sensitive medical data.3 Farmers existence. Digital divides across geographies and de- in rural areas access AI-driven tools for crop manage- mographic groups—whether between urban and rural ment and weather forecasting, relying on mobile net- areas, genders, generations, education levels or in- works to receive timely insights.4 Education systems come categories—persist. use AI-powered applications to personalize learning.5 For instance, while 51 percent of the world’s popu- The current state of connectivity, characterized lation is covered by a fifth-generation wireless cellular by deep divides, risks creating a multispeed digital network, 400 million people still rely on a third-gen- world. In such a scenario a privileged few, equipped eration network to connect. In rural areas of low- with the necessary infrastructure, skills and resourc- income countries almost 30 percent of the population es, dominate AI innovation and reap its rewards. At remains off the grid, with no possibility to connect. the same time, marginalized communities struggle Despite falling prices affordability remains a major with limited or no access to the tools needed to par- barrier. In Sub-Sharan Africa people in low-income ticipate in this new digital era. Without universal and countries spend about 5 percent of their income for meaningful connectivity the divides of the analogue an entry-level mobile data plan—14 times what peo- world are at risk of being magnified in the digital one. ple in Europe spend. And the average mobile broad- Recognizing these challenges, the concept of uni- band traffic per subscription for an entire month in versal and meaningful connectivity has emerged as low-income economies (2 gigabytes) is consumed in a critical policy objective. It is defined as enabling less than four days in high-income countries. everyone to enjoy a safe, enriching and productive Connectivity is not merely about being online. It online experience at an affordable cost. creates education, healthcare, communication and Universal and meaningful connectivity does not economic opportunities while fostering creativity, in- mean that everyone must be connected all the time. novation and collaboration.2 But basic connectivity Instead, it is a situation where everyone can access alone cannot unleash the full potential of the digital the internet optimally and affordably whenever and CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 193 wherever needed. Individuals choose how to use this measurement.6 In 2024, under the Brazilian Presi- opportunity. dency of the Group of 20, the group’s ministers of dig- The universal and meaningful connectivity frame- ital economy adopted a joint declaration committing work has six dimensions: quality (of connection), to achieving universal and meaningful connectivity.7 availability (for use), affordability, security, devic- The UN Global Digital Compact acknowledges the es and skills. The dimensions are interdependent; pivotal role of universal and meaningful connectivity strength in one area cannot compensate for deficien- in unlocking the full potential of digital and emerging cies in another. Achieving universal and meaningful technologies.8 connectivity thus requires holistic strategies relying While universal and meaningful connectivity of- on various interventions spanning infrastructure, fers transformative potential, one must recognize policies and education and involving different stake- the dangers of connectivity. Unchecked expansion of holders. But the framework is deliberately agnostic the digital sphere can exacerbate issues such as mis- about specific interventions—investment, policies or information, digital surveillance and cybersecurity regulation—as there is no single pathway and no one- threats.9 Digital infrastructure, including energy con- size-fits-all strategy to achieve universal and mean- sumption and e-waste, has a major environmental ingful connectivity. It is also agnostic about what impact.10 Policies promoting universal and meaning- people use connectivity for—that is, its applications. ful connectivity must therefore include safeguards to The neutrality of use cases is paramount: it is impos- mitigate these risks and ensure that connectivity ad- sible to prescribe an ideal digital behaviour. vances human development. Since universal and meaningful connectivity was Just as electricity transformed societies as a gener- formulated in 2021, it has garnered much attention. al purpose technology, connectivity now plays a simi- In 2022 the International Telecommunication Union lar role. However, its impact on human development (ITU) made it a strategic goal in its 2022–2026 Stra- hinges on how inclusive and meaningful that connec- tegic Plan. In 2023, recognizing the criticality of tivity is. As the world seeks to leverage AI and other measurement in achieving universal and meaningful advanced technologies for inclusive growth, univer- connectivity, the European Union provided the ITU sal and meaningful connectivity represents a policy with funding to promote the concept and improve its imperative. NOTES 1. Unless indicated otherwise, all data in this spotlight are estimates for 5. Khan 2024. 2024 from ITU (2024d). See the International Telecommunication Union 6. ITU n.d. datahub at https://datahub.itu.int/. 7. See Digital Economy Working Group and others (2024). 2. ITU 2023b. 8. See ITU (2023c) and UN (2024a). 3. ITU 2021. 9. ITU 2023a. 4. ITU and FAO 2021. 10. ITU 2024c. 194 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 SPOTLIGHT 6.3 Global case studies of social dialogue on artificial intelligence and algorithmic management Virginia Doellgast, Shruti Appalla, Dina Ginzburg, Jeonghun Kim, Wen Li Thian, Cornell University School of Industrial and Labor Relations Employers are adopting or refining artificial intel- Social dialogue over the employment and skill impacts ligence (AI) and algorithm-based tools in the work- of AI: From labour replacing to labour complementing place, with transformative impacts on work and employment.1 In an International Labour Organiza- New AI- and algorithm-based tools can be applied to tion working paper we examined case studies of so- automate jobs and tasks in a way that leads to down- cial dialogue over AI and algorithmic management sizing or replacement of workers and their skills.4 in different countries and industries.2 Our analysis These tools may also contribute to deskilling work, suggests that social dialogue is most effective in es- allowing the downgrading of jobs to more repetitive tablishing a more socially equitable and sustainable or lower-value tasks. Alternatively, these tools can approach to AI investment when it moves employers complement or augment workers’ skills and help towards strategies that take a longer-term view on them develop new skills and modes of working.5 returns from the investment. This means commit- Management decisions play an important role in en- ting to creating good jobs with benefits and security, couraging labour-complementing AI investment—for sharing productivity gains with workers, investing in example, giving workers discretion over how they use skills and worker discretion, limiting invasive data tools or restructuring production in a way that creates collection and monitoring, and establishing fair and new, high-productivity tasks.6 transparent opportunities for workers to challenge Through social dialogue labour unions and other and change technology-enabled decisions. Where worker representatives can encourage employers to worker representatives have engaged in social di- use AI in ways that complement and upskill rather alogue over AI, they have sought to institutionalize than replace and deskill work. Collective agreements these commitments in collective agreements, laws can discourage a narrow labour-replacing approach and policies. to AI through job and location security agreements, This spotlight summarizes the findings of our restrictions on permitted uses of AI and rules con- analysis of social dialogue cases at the industry and cerning ownership of and control over creative work company level. The findings are organized around and images. For example, in the Republic of Korea three action fields in which worker representatives the unions at KB Bank led a successful campaign to have sought to influence strategies and outcomes as- reverse layoffs of subcontracted call centre workers sociated with the growing use of AI and algorithms in associated with the increased use of AI chatbots. In the workplace: social dialogue over the employment Canada and the United States screen writers, actors and skill impacts of AI, social dialogue over algorith- and journalists have negotiated agreements with mic management and social dialogue over working rules concerning how AI can be used in writing and conditions and rights in the AI value chain.3 It con- editing and disclosure of AI-generated material, as cludes with a discussion of three factors that played well as protections concerning the use of AI-generat- an important role in supporting successful social di- ed replicas of human performers. alogue: negotiated or legal constraints on employ- Social dialogue has also actively encouraged la- er exit from employment relationships, institutions bour-complementing strategies by establishing new and resources that support collective worker voice in rules or joint efforts to invest in skills upgrading to im- organizational decisionmaking and labour strategies prove workers’ control over how they apply their skills based on inclusive forms of solidarity. when using AI-based tools and to share AI-generated CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 195 productivity gains with the workforce. In Japan so- performance—for example, through AI-enabled cam- cial dialogue between the Aeon Group and its labour eras, wearable devices and voice recordings applying federation established a productivity improvement speech analytics. These tools can be used to inten- subcommittee under a labour–management coun- sify surveillance and discipline and to reduce work- cil to support joint decisionmaking on AI and digital ers’ control over the pace and content of their work.7 transformation initiatives. Agreements secured job They can also contribute to or reproduce biased de- security and redeployment of workers to higher-val- cisions with considerable employment impacts, such ue-added areas and redistributed productivity gains as hiring or firing.8 At the same time, algorithmic through wage increases for the majority part-time management technologies may empower workers by workforce and for entry-level jobs. In Brazil a nation- giving them more control over working methods and al collective agreement in the banking sector includ- schedules or improving transparency in management ed provisions for reskilling in the face of technologies decisionmaking.9 such as AI, with a focus on mitigating gender inequal- Social dialogue with unions and other worker rep- ity. Banking employers agreed to finance scholarships resentatives has focused on reducing the risks as- for women to take information technology courses, sociated with intensified control and bias and on with priority given to women facing socioeconomic improving worker voice in algorithmic management vulnerability. decisions. First, agreements have established base- Deutsche Telekom in Germany has one of the most line workers’ rights to data protection and informa- comprehensive agreements establishing both job se- tion on how their data are used. Second, they have curity and investment in upskilling, underpinned by limited monitoring intensity from new AI-based tools worker voice. A 2010 agreement states that automa- and encouraged the use of performance data to im- tion should first be used to reduce subcontracting and prove skills rather than to discipline workers. Third, commits the employer to train internal employees af- agreements have established human-in-command fected by automation for new jobs. In the mid-2010s principles, where final decisions on employment-re- the works council organized an eight month project to lated matters require human oversight, underpinned analyse the impact of new digital and algorithm- and by AI ethics commitments. AI-enabled tools on worker skills, jobs and perfor- Different combinations of these focus areas can mance. Based on the findings, a series of agreements be seen across case studies. For example, IBM Ger- was negotiated that established a process for ongoing many negotiated a 2020 agreement on the use of AI consultation and negotiation over new technologies systems with its works council that classifies AI ap- and their workforce impacts. Management commit- plications based on their risk and prohibits the use ted to drawing up a digital roadmap with planned of AI for automated decisions with immediate ef- digitalization measures and to discussing with the fects on employees without human oversight. It also works council the impacts on employment numbers, established an AI ethics council made up of AI ex- service quality and work content. This feeds into perts and employer and employee representatives strategic planning on new agreements for specific to evaluate AI applications and oversee implemen- technologies. tation of the agreement. An agreement in the Span- ish banking sector established worker rights to not be subject to decisions based solely and exclusively Social dialogue over algorithmic management: on automated variables, to nondiscrimination and From labour controlling to labour empowering to request human oversight and intervention. In the United Kingdom an agreement at Parcelforce Management itself is being transformed by AI- and established that delivery drivers have a right to pri- algorithm-based tools. AI is used in predictive or vacy and that new technology will not be deployed human resources analytics to hire new workers, de- as a disciplinary tool. At UPS in the United States, termine training needs and allocate work. AI is also driver-facing cameras are not allowed, and GPS, used to recognize patterns recorded or gathered telematics and cameras cannot be used as the sole through diverse electronic data sources to evaluate basis for discipline. In the Dominican Republic and 196 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 India unions in the business process outsourcing in- organized across vendors, platforms or freelance em- dustry have mobilized to improve data transparency ployment contracts. This in turn permits the displace- and establish limits on the use of AI for sentiment ment of jobs from organizations and employment analysis and intensified surveillance. These differ- contracts with established social protections and col- ent agreements place clear limits on the use of high- lective agreements. Different from labour-replacing risk tools while improving transparency and worker impacts, in which technology directly replaces tasks trust. or jobs, labour-displacing applications of AI permit In the United States a 2018 union agreement with organizations to move work to new (often more poor- 34 Las Vegas casino resorts included a process to ly regulated or lower-paid) contracts, organizations bargain over the implementation of new technolo- or locations. gy. In one example the union used these rights, as The focus of social dialogue efforts in the AI value well as worker mobilization and innovative data chain has been to embed or re-embed AI-related analysis, to challenge and eventually change the jobs in labour and social protections that have been use of an algorithm-based app that was used to dic- displaced from those protections. Labour union or- tate the room cleaning order to housekeeping staff. ganizing and social dialogue in this area have taken In dialogue with the app’s developer, the workers two—sometimes connected—forms. The first re- and the employer agreed to contract provisions that lies on solidarity from unions in lead firms, as core restored worker autonomy and discretion and made technology professionals with more secure con- it easier for the union to monitor workload viola- tracts seek improved conditions for more precar- tions. A partnership with the developer and the Cu- ious contract or platform workers. In the United linary Academy of Las Vegas, funded through the States unions have organized workers at technolo- union contract, provided training on the software to gy, media and game development firms, including encourage more effective use of the app. The 2023 Alphabet, the parent company of Google. One key contract included rights to privacy from tracking focus of union action at Alphabet has been improv- technology, to bargain over technology that tracks ing conditions among the company’s more precar- employee locations, to notification and bargaining ious majority temporary, vendor and contractor over data sharing with a third party, to healthcare workforce. Union members have mobilized to sup- and severance pay for workers laid off due to new port reinstatement, increased pay and benefits, and technology and to compensation for tipped employ- unionization. ees if a technology failure makes it impossible for The second form of social dialogue to improve them to do their job. conditions in AI value chains relies on organizing by workers in more precarious AI-related jobs. In Kenya workers who annotate data and moderate Social dialogue over working conditions content have sought to mobilize to improve condi- and rights in the AI value chain: From tions. This included bringing legal cases against the labour displacing to labour embedding subcontractor Sama and its client firms for alleged workers’ rights violations, including exploitation, The AI value chain to produce and refine AI-based union busting, illegal termination of contracts and technologies has created a new set of jobs in data pay discrimination. In 2023 a union was formed to coding, labelling and engineering that are organized represent workers at a range of contract firms that or- across borders in different countries, often with low ganize AI-related data janitorial services. The union pay and tight controls.10 AI data work is organized has partnered with local civil society organizations, through subcontractors that employ workers in phys- as well as international organizations working to ical workplaces and through microwork organized create ethical standards for AI deployment. These over platforms. It can be described as an example of initiatives aim to influence policies at the national AI-enabled fissuring, as firms develop more sophisti- and international levels, including transparency, fair cated AI-based tools to monitor performance and dis- compensation and protections against algorithmic tribute work across a spatially dispersed workforce, exploitation. CHAPTER 6 — REIMAGINING CHOICES: T OWARDS ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE– AUGMENTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT 197 Conclusion uses of AI to automate human resources decisions or of sentiment analysis tools could help establish more The findings demonstrate a range of creative AI-fo- transparent workplace rules. In many cases worker cused social dialogue initiatives across three action mobilization, sometimes through strikes, were cru- fields: skills and employment, algorithmic manage- cial in bargaining to establish or extend protections to ment and working conditions in AI value chains. AI-based tools. Three factors played an important role in supporting Finally, strategies of inclusive labour solidarity these initiatives: negotiated or legal constraints on helped ensure that the most vulnerable workers in employer exit from employment relationships, insti- easily rationalized or monitored jobs were included tutions and resources that support collective worker in social dialogue efforts. The negative impacts of voice in organizational decisionmaking and labour AI bias and invasive algorithmic management prac- strategies based on inclusive solidarity.11 tices are heavily concentrated among workers who In the cases reviewed, strong employment pro- also tend to hold more precarious contracts. Labor tections and skill investment were central goals that solidarity has been crucial in AI value chains for ex- made it more difficult or less desirable for firms to exit tending bargaining power and building a strong their internal workforce through downsizing, deskill- movement of workers in more and less precarious en- ing or outsourcing. Laws establishing clear rules and gineering, programming and data labelling jobs. copyright protections on the use of generative AI to These three factors—constraints on employer reproduce art, voice or images are one example. Col- exit, support for worker voice and strategies of in- lective agreements across countries provided job se- clusive labour solidarity—were present in differ- curity, commitments to decrease subcontracting or ent combinations across the case studies of social support for retraining and redeploying workers. dialogue on AI. However, worker representatives Support for collective worker voice took different in these cases also sought to strengthen minimum forms. Strong participation rights and laws, unions standards and worker voice in decisionmaking by and tripartite social dialogue traditions were critical establishing new laws, policies and collective agree- resources for negotiating AI-focused agreements. ments. These solidaristic organizing and mobiliza- Data protection laws and agreements were used to tion efforts are an important first step in promoting limit worker surveillance and provide information on alternative high road approaches to AI investment what data were collected on workers or how the data that are designed by the workers most directly af- were used. And bright line prohibitions of certain fected by the technologies. NOTES 1. AI refers to computer systems that can perform tasks traditionally requir- 3. Doellgast 2023. ing human intelligence, including advanced pattern recognition and 4. Eloundou and others 2024; Frey and Osborne 2017. problem solving (Russell and Norvig 2021). 5. Gmyrek, Berg and Bescond 2023. 2. The case study examples in this spotlight are from our International Labour Organization Working Paper (Doellgast and others forthcoming), 6. Acemoğlu and Restrepo 2020; Zysman and Nitzberg 2024. where they are described in more detail. We use the International Labour 7. Rani, Pesole and Vázquez 2024. Organization’s definition of social dialogue, which includes “all types of negotiation, consultation or simply exchange of information between, 8. Ajunwa 2023. or among, representatives of governments, employers and workers, 9. Jarrahi, Möhlmann and Lee 2023. on issues of common interest relating to economic and social policy. [….] Workplace cooperation, collective bargaining at company, sector or 10. Muldoon, Graham and Cant 2024. cross-industry levels, and tripartite consultation processes are common 11. Doellgast 2022. forms of social dialogue” (ILO 2025). 198 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Notes and references 199 Notes OVERVIEW 15 Among respondents who expect AI to change 31 Brynjolfsson 2022a; US National Academies their jobs, the majority expect both augmen- of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine 2024. 1 The belief that virtually any problem has a tation and automation. Among respondents technological solution. 32 Autor 2024. who expect only either augmentation or 2 Hoffman and Beato (2025) provide a per- automation, roughly twice as many expect 33 Autor and others 2024; Crafts 2021b; Ernst, spective on the opportunity side of AI if it is augmentation as expect automation. Merola and Samaan 2019. designed for human agency. 16 See, for example, Conboye (2025), who 34 Bastian and others 2024; Higgins and others 3 Galaz 2025. found that close to 60 percent of respondents 2021; Liu and others 2024. under age 35 in China, Indonesia and Peru 4 The United Nations Development Programme 35 Hatherley 2020. said that AI would make their job better in the survey on AI and Human Development is one next five years, compared with less than 30 36 Dvijotham and others 2023. of the world’s largest public opinion surveys percent in Canada, Japan and the Republic of on AI in the past three years. From November 37 Brynjolfsson, Li and Raymond 2025. Korea, based on data from the 2024 Ipsos AI 2024 to January 2025, more than 21,000 peo- Monitor (Carmichael 2024). 38 Noy and Zhang 2023. ple in 21 countries and 36 languages were sur- veyed, representing 63 percent of the world’s 17 Cui and Yasseri 2024. 39 Peng and others 2023. population. These 21 countries were selected 18 For example, addressing AI biases in health 40 Dell’Acqua and others 2023. to provide results covering different Human applications requires better algorithms and Development Index groups and regions of the 41 Agrawal, Gans and Goldfarb 2023; Kanazawa data, but coding alone will not redress biases world. The survey primarily employed random- and others 2022. See also Kanazawa and (Marwala 2024). This in part because biases re- ized telephone polling to ensure broad reach others (2022). Whether these sector-specific quire constant attention and monitoring, given across varied populations (with web polling effects extend to the whole economy is un- that fairness considerations are context specific used in two countries). The 19 questions in the known as of now. and dynamic (Mienye, Swart and Obaido 2024). survey capture how AI is influencing daily life, 42 Babina and others 2024. shifting decisionmaking power and redefining 19 Adapa and others 2025; Dangi, Sharma and public confidence in technology. Vageriya 2025; Zuhair and others 2024. 43 Wilson, Daugherty and Bianzino 2017. Explainer calls for translational expertise, 5 The very high HDI threshold value is 0.800. 20 Labadze, Grigolia and Machaidze 2023. so that outputs from AI can be evaluated 6 The loss of steam in global progress could 21 Alzate 2023; Pedro and others 2019; Vincent- and assessed before being incorporated indicate a lower trend going forward. Health in- Lancrin and Van der Vlies 2020. into decisionmaking. AI hallucinations and dicators, particularly life expectancy at birth, are human-AI miscommunications are certain to 22 Drolia and others 2022; Government of increasing more slowly, with an annual increase create value for having a human with “skin Mexico 2020. of about 0.130 a year for 2023–2024, compared in the game” somewhere between prompt with 0.267 a year for 1990–2019. This slower 23 Blanchflower 2021. and implementation. Trainer encompasses trend for life expectancy at birth is projected to new tasks such as prompt engineering and 24 Blanchflower, Bryson and Xu 2024. continue in the coming decades (2025–2050). retrieval-augmented generation. Having AI The world could have attained very high HDI 25 Blanchflower 2025a. accomplish tasks for humans, making the status by 2030 if global HDI values had con- most out of AI, will require humans writing 26 Thiagarajan, Newson and Swaminathan 2025. tinued to follow the pre-2020 trend. However, prompts and customizing models for domain- based on the 2021–2024 trend, achieving very 27 Thompson 2024. specific applications—already on ChatGPT high HDI status has been postponed by three there are hundreds of thousands of domain- 28 Touzet 2023. years, to 2033. If the 2023–2024 trend persists, specific applications created by humans the delay may extend to three decades. 29 Consider Google Relate, a free mobile ap- (Korinek and Vipra 2024a). Sustainer encom- plication that can support communication passes tasks associated with keeping up with 7 Rodrik and Sandhu 2024; Stiglitz 2021. between people with communication dis- AI progress and ensuring that both skills and 8 Rodrik and Stiglitz 2024. abilities and strangers. Making it work well organizational processes make the most of is contingent on changes in communication the opportunities as they evolve over time. In 9 Acemoğlu, Autor and Johnson 2024; Autor norms—through, for instance, greater ac- the example above radiologists have taken 2024; Rodrik and Stiglitz 2024. ceptance of diverse ways of communicating. on the tasks of explainer and sustainer, even 10 Ludwig and Mullainathan 2024. Automatic speech recognition can alter the as AI has augmented the task of diagnosis. dynamic of the conversation—for example, 11 Huang and others 2025; Li and others 2023. 44 J-PAL 2023; Lipowski, Salomons and Zierahn- by adding pauses or altering the flow. If the Weilage 2024. 12 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. other person in the conversation does not understand or refuses to cooperate, the 45 UN and ILO 2024. 13 Autor 2022; Baily, Brynjolfsson and Korinek interaction cannot take place (Ayoka and oth- 2023; Bresnahan 2024; Brynjolfsson 2022b; 46 UN and ILO 2024. ers 2024). Korinek 2024c; Manyika and Spence 2023. 47 For example, Cazzaniga and others (2024) 30 Deep gender gaps in the use of generative AI 14 This is a simple unweighted average; each find that higher educated workers in high- persist even when access to AI is enhanced country’s average response carries equal income economies are better positioned to (Otis, Delecourt and others 2024). weight. harness generative AI for work augmentation and have more access to and an easier time NOTES 201 transitioning to roles where generative AI is how likely they would be (Rosenberg and oth- building, with machines linked to that single likely to enhance their work. ers 2024). On the potential tradeoffs between source of power through shafts and cables leveraging AI for growth and addressing (David 1990). 48 Gmyrek, Winkler and Garganta 2024. possible existential risks, see Jones (2024), 11 Declining production costs due to technologi- 49 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. who finds that if AI reduces mortality, it would cal innovation tend to translate into higher net still make sense to take existential risks (see 50 To be clear, the argument is about comple- income for consumers, and technological also C. I. Jones 2025). One concern is that AI mentarity between humans and AI in the cre- innovation improves welfare through, for ex- can self-replicate without human intervention, ative process, not replacing human creativity ample, hedonic effects, which are no less real with some studies suggesting that this frontier with machines, which even if it were feasible, for being difficult to measure. We are grateful may have already been surpassed (Pan and would not be desirable from a human devel- to David Zuluaga Martínez for suggesting others 2024). However, using AI to improve AI opment perspective. these mechanisms at play. is already widely practiced; it actually extends 51 Cockburn, Henderson and Stern 2019; Crafts to the pre-AI era of software development. 12 Nordhaus 2004. The study refers to the US 2021a; US National Academies of Sciences, Narayanan and Kapoor (2024b) argue that economy and estimates that between 1995 Engineering and Medicine 2024. what gives humans power is not intelligence and 2000 new digital firms appropriated only as such but our ability to work together with $400 billion of the $6 trillion increase in social 52 Binz and others 2025; Delgado-Chaves and technology, so more-powerful technology value created by digital firms and that inves- others 2025; Luo, Rechardt and others 2024; makes us more, not less, powerful. In addition, tors’ overestimates of the extent to which Musslick and others 2025. there are technical challenges in being able firms could appropriate innovations might 53 Along the lines of the complementarity be- to estimate AI-related risks, as reviewed in have led to the rapid increase in stock market tween humans and AI discussed in Felin and Narayanan and Kapoor (2024a). valuations and subsequent collapse (the so- Holweg (2024). See also Dubova, Galesic and called tech bubble) of the 1990s. Adding new 4 For a comprehensive review of the state of Goldstone (2022). features such as a camera to a smartphone AI and its future at the time of writing, see generates value to consumers an order of 54 Adam 2023; Epstein and others 2023. For AAAI (2025), and for a media summary, see magnitude greater than what they pay (Bryn- example, AI that defeated humans at games N. Jones (2025). Evidence suggests that one jolfsson and others forthcoming). See also such as chess by learning to play the games gap in AI adoption is a lack of understand- Brynjolfsson, Kim and Oh (2024). themselves is now inspiring chess grandmas- ing of its capabilities and limitations (see ters with nonhuman moves that make them Cucio and Hennig 2025 for the case of the 13 Brynjolfsson and others 2023. The lower more creative (Schut and others 2025). Philippines). share in very high HDI countries is consis- tent with results from other surveys showing 55 Acemoğlu 2024. 5 This is inspired by Narayanan and Kapoor higher expected AI use in middle-income (2024b, p. 285). 56 Eriksson and others 2025. countries. 6 Bradford 2023; Bradford, Waxman and Li 57 Wang, Hertzmann and Russakovsky 2024. 14 The United Nations Development Programme Forthcoming; Lang and others 2024; Olson survey on AI and Human Development is one 58 Schmid and others 2025. 2024; Suleyman 2023. of the world’s largest public opinion surveys 59 Dennis 2024. 7 Bengio and others 2025; Gerundino and oth- on AI in the past three years. From November ers 2024; UN 2024c. 2024 to January 2025, more than 21,000 60 Esmaeilzadeh (2024) report an ongoing cul- people in 21 countries and 36 languages tural shift in healthcare, with AI being increas- 8 See the B-Tech project from the United Na- were surveyed, representing 63 percent of ingly viewed as a delivery enhancer and job tions Office of the High Commissioner for the world’s population. These 21 countries creator rather than as a threat. Human Rights, which provides guidance into were selected to provide results covering the regulation and operation of technology 61 Perhaps analogous to the way that pharma- different HDI groups and regions of the world. companies, grounded on the UN Guiding ceuticals are deployed and monitored, as The survey primarily employed randomized Principles on Business and Human Rights suggested in Belenguer (2022). telephone polling to ensure broad reach (https://www.ohchr.org/en/business-and across varied populations (with web polling 62 Consider the seminal works in economics by, -human-rights/b-tech-project). used in two countries). The 19 questions in the for example, Romer (1994, 1990) and Solow 9 Hoffman and Beato (2025) also provide a survey capture how AI is influencing daily life, (1956), who show that productivity growth hing- perspective on the opportunity side of AI if it shifting decisionmaking power and redefining es on knowledge and technological change. is designed for human agency. public confidence in technology. “ 63 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. 10 The lack of productivity gains from just substi- 15 Close to 60 percent of respondents under 64 Verhoogen 2023. tuting one general-purpose technology with age 35 in China, Indonesia and Peru said that another while keeping everything else the AI would make their job better in the next five 65 Diouf and others 2024; Mishra and others same occurred when electric motors became years, compared with less than 30 percent 2023. available in the late 19th century. When facto- in Canada, Japan and the Republic of Korea 66 Wei, Jörg and Rolf 2024. ries simply replaced steam-powered engines, (Conboye 2025 using data from Ipsos AI the expensive switch did not yield any pro- Monitor 2024 for 32 countries; https://www. 67 Allen and others 2025; Shahriar and others ductivity gains, and many firms decided not to ipsos.com/en-us/ipsos-ai-monitor-2024). 2025. adopt the new technology. (Interestingly, the 16 Autor 2022; Baily, Brynjolfsson and Korinek 68 Swartz, Denecke and Scheepers 2023; Wal- same delay happened when steam power 2023; Bresnahan 2024; Brynjolfsson 2022; ton 2022. became available in the early 19th century, Korinek 2024c. and many factories decided not to replace waterpower: while steam power became 17 On the narrowing of past development CHAPTER 1 available around 1830, by the beginning of pathways and the need to reinvent new ap- 1 Mitchell 2025. the 20th century, only 40–50 percent of proaches, see Rodrik and Sandhu (2024) and US mills had adopted it; Hornbeck and oth- Stiglitz (2021). On the historical importance 2 As explored in Korinek and Suh (2024). ers 2024). It was not until several decades of manufacturing in creating jobs at scale, 3 Bengio and others 2024; Harari 2024; Müller later that a reorganization of production particularly for low-skilled workers, and in and Bostrom 2026; Ord 2020. There is wide harnessed the potential of electric motors. In driving economywide productivity growth, disagreement about the extent to which AI this reorganization multiple electrical motors see Rodrik (2012). On the role of manufactur- poses existential risks, with experts unable to were attached to each machine in a factory ing in reducing poverty, see Erumban and agree even on what kind of evidence would spread out horizontally on a single floor. This de Vries (2024). Part of the appeal of manu- suggest whether those risks may emerge or replaced steam-engine production in which a facturing is that the products are tradable, so factory used only one source of power in a tall some—though not all—of the advantages of 202 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 manufacturing could be extended to tradable potential to advance art, along with some of is different from having AI do what engineers services (Inklaar, Marapin and Gräler 2024). To the emerging risks, see Epstein and others do (Xu, Kotecha and McAdams 2024) and leverage tradables, it is important to be able (2023). Other examples include how AI can lawyers (Kapoor, Henderson and Narayanan to export to international markets to avoid be- enhance design (Jiang and others 2024; Zhu 2024; Socol de la Osa and Remolina 2024). ing constrained by (potentially small) domestic and others 2018), writing (Hitsuwari and oth- 39 Garassino and others 2025. markets; see Goldberg and Reed (2023). ers 2023; T. Wang and others 2024; Yuan and others 2022), music (Doh and others 2023; 40 For example, people with no experience 18 Diao and others 2024; Rodrik 2015; UNCTAD Ding and others 2024; Gardner and others with computer programming can now create 2024. On how the transition to services un- 2023), humour (Wu, Weber and Müller 2025) apps and other software from scratch just by folded in India, see Fan, Peters and Zilibotti and interpretation of literary metaphors (Ich- describing in normal spoken language what (2023). Kruse and others (2023) report an ien, Stamenković and Holyoak 2024). they want the tools to achieve—something increase in manufacturing in some low- and that has been called vibecoding (Rose 2025). middle-income countries but still conclude 27 Since 2017 AI such as AlphaZero has been that further employment opportunities in shown to consistently beat any human at the 41 For example, as of mid-March 2025, almost manufacturing are likely to be constrained game (Silver and others 2018). But subscrib- half of large-scale large language models by automation, which is the key point that ers to chess.com have increased more than have published and downloadable weights will be elaborated later in the chapter. Her- fivefold since then, from 20 million in 2017 to (the numbers in the neural network that re- rendorf, Rogerson and Valentinyi (2022) 100 million in 2022 (https://www.chess.com/ flect the machine’s learning), offering much show that, contrary to what is often assumed, article/view/chesscom-reaches-100-million- flexibility in customizing these models (https:// productivity in services is higher in low- and members). AI has driven this renaissance of epoch.ai/data/large-scale-ai-models). A mid- middle-income countries than in high-income interest in chess, in part by creating more op- February 2025 account describes the previ- countries, unlike productivity in both agricul- portunities for people to play the game, train ous month as “one of those months where it ture and services, which is lower and showing and get better at it when they play with other feels like a year passes in the open-source increasing gaps. X. Chen and others (2023) humans (Gaessler and Piezunka 2023). See ecosystem,” presenting multiple examples show that since 2005 productivity increases also Machajewski (2024). of open-source datasets and AI models in China have been higher in services than in (Lambert and Brand 2025). 28 For evidence that streaming stimulates de- manufacturing. On how structural transforma- mand for live music, see Christensen (2022). 42 Farrell and others 2025. tion can unfold without industrialization, see In 2024 global streaming revenue reached Jing and Foltz (2024) for Côte d’Ivoire and 43 Mutiso 2025; Nuwer 2024; Signé 2025. At $20 billion, up from $13 billion, and perfor- McCullough (2025) for Tanzania. the same time it should not be seen as a mance rights reached $3 billion in 2020, panacea (Krishna 2024). 19 Acemoğlu, Autor and Johnson 2024; Autor up from $2 billion (IFPI 2024). More broadly, 2024; Rodrik and Stiglitz 2024. there is often complementarity between 44 OECD 2025c. physical and digital goods. For instance, the 20 Caballero and others (2025) provide a com- 45 Korinek 2024c. digitalization of books has increased demand pelling illustration that digital innovation on for hard copies (Bhuller and others 2024). 46 Acemoğlu and others 2023; Das, Amini and its own does not improve access to credit in Wu 2025; Gadotti and others 2024; Goldfarb small firms in emerging economies. 29 Korinek 2024c. and Que 2023. 21 Bresnahan 2024; Gollin and Kaboski 2023. 30 Lazar 2024b. 47 Ludwig and Mullainathan 2024. 22 Computational machines are those able to 31 Brynjolfsson, Mitchell and Rock 2018; Gath- 48 And if it were able to make accurate predic- access, process and act on abstract informa- mann, Grimm and Winkler 2025. tions, there might be moral reasons to object tion (Brynjolfsson and Hitt 2000; US National 32 Lazear and others (2022) articulate key dif- to having people subject to AI predictions Academies of Sciences, Engineering and ferences for productivity and wages between (Lazar and Stone 2024). Medicine 2024). the digital world before and with AI. 49 Narayanan and Kapoor 2024b; A. Wang and 23 Following Sendhil Mullainathan and col- 33 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. others 2024. Moreover, what Neumann and leagues (Ludwig, Mullainathan and Ram- others (2024) called data deserts implies risks bachan 2025). 34 Manyika and Spence (2023) discuss how AI of underrepresenting low-income segments could unleash an economic revolution that 24 For example, the large language model that of the population. would trigger productivity growth. powered GPT-4 initially achieved only 4.3 per- 50 We are grateful to David Zuluaga Martínez for cent accuracy in multidigit multiplication (Yang 35 Acemoğlu and Restrepo 2020. this point. and others 2023b). A “smart” machine fails at 36 Gray and Suri 2019; Muldoon, Graham and something in which a dumb pocket calcula- 51 Volokh 2023. Cant 2024; Muldoon and others 2024. Im- tor achieves 100 percent accuracy because pacts vary across the world, with workers in 52 Browne and others 2023. of the inherent differences between AI and places with weaker labour regulations or insti- earlier digital tools, as explored in the chap- 53 Guerreiro and others 2023; Huang and oth- tutions such as trade unions more vulnerable ter. For a feisty account of the reasons why ers 2025; Li and others 2023. (Doellgast 2023). One harmful implication large language models have failed on basic relates to the deterioration of psychological 54 Caplin 2025a. The deviations may even arithmetic, see Marcus (2023). Despite on- wellbeing in content moderation workers extend upstream, given that AI is trained on going improvements, numeracy gaps in large (Gonzalez and Matias 2025; Steiger and oth- human data (Treiman, Ho and Kool 2024). language models remain pervasive (Li and ers 2021). others 2025). This does not mean that large 55 These choices influence decisions ranging language models cannot improve at the tasks 37 Creutzig and others 2022; Galaz 2025. For from the direction of AI, its use to either au- they are not good at. For instance, much effort the challenge of AI-related e-waste, see tomate or augment tasks by firms and how has been deployed to improve mathematical P. Wang and others (2024). These challenges people interact with AI (Brynjolfsson 2022; “reasoning” in large language models (Ahn are exacerbated as the scale of the AI models Korinek 2024c; Korinek and Stiglitz 2018, and others 2024) and better understand the increases (Varoquaux, Luccioni and Whittaker 2020; Trammell and Korinek 2023). reasons for persistent limitations (Feng and 2024). 56 Summerfield (2025) describes large language others 2024; Shrestha, Kim and Ross 2025). 38 Hager and others 2024; Singhal and oth- models as “strange new minds.” 25 Cave and Dihal 2019; Craig and others 2018; ers 2023; Singhal and others 2025. AI can 57 Sejnowski 2023, p. 311. Mitchell 2023b, 2024a, 2024b. already fulfil the requirements to get an en- gineering degree (Borges and others 2024) 58 Frank 2023; Karell, Sachs and Barrett 2025; 26 For a fascinating application of AI to enhance and pass the uniform bar examination in the Mei and others 2024; Mitchell 2023a, 2024a; teaching of Tang poetry, see Chen and Wu United States (Katz and others 2024), but that Mitchell and Krakauer 2023; Shiffrin and (2024). For a more general discussion of AI’s NOTES 203 Mitchell 2023; Trott and others 2023. There both scientifically and by decisionmakers. 78 In one study overall reading times were are efforts to characterize the psychological Deroy (2023) and Dorsch and Deroy (2025) shortened, but when AI detected abnormali- profiles of large language models (Pellert and go further and question the ethics of using ties, reading times increased (Shin and others others 2024), including based on whether anthropomorphic language with respect to AI. 2023). For reasons discussed later in the they are able to mirror humans’ theory of chapter, the nature of AI implies that the in- 69 Hinton 2016. For a video, see https://www. mind—that is, people’s ability to infer other’s teraction between radiologists and AI is more youtube.com/watch?v=2HMPRXstSvQ&t=29s. mental states (Shapira and others 2024; Stra- nuanced, with heterogenous effects across chan and others 2024). And their behaviour 70 An economically coherent and possible sce- different radiologists (Yu and others 2024). as economic agents (Fontana, Pierri and nario described in Nordhaus (2021). 79 In addition to the analysis of tasks, it is im- Aiello 2024) considers how different large 71 In general, it might be difficult to extrapolate portant to determine whether a price reduc- language models play the prisoner’s dilemma AI advances tested on abstracted versions of tion leads to more demand overall, which game. Y. Chen and others (2023) document real-world problems to their effects in the real depends in part on how responsive demand the emergence of economic rationality, and world. Foundational AI efforts such as those is to the decline in price—what economists Raman and others (2024) propose a bench- that Geoffrey Hinton pioneered are crucial call the price elasticity of demand. When pro- mark to assess that rationality. These debates and were recognized with a Nobel Prize in ductivity improves in a sector, making more and efforts will continue to guide the evolu- 2024, but real-world applications are not de- with less does not mean that there will be less tion of AI as a science and as a technology, in termined alone by how well the models per- labour demand in that sector (let alone in the the same way that Herbert Simon challenged form theoretically or in more circumscribed economy as a whole): even if each clinic sees the scientific community many years ago to domains. We are grateful to Zi Wang for this less demand for radiologists because of pro- build a machine that could beat humans at insight. ductivity gains, cheaper radiology services chess (Simon 1971). may increase overall demand for more clin- 72 D’Souza and Davis 2024. See also Hender- 59 Vallor (2024), along the lines also argued in ics. Think of what happened with air travel son (2022). Ironically, the increase in demand Krakowski (2025). Evidence at the firm level when jet engines replaced propellers. Pilots for radiologists stems in part from medical shows that AI adoption will involve both au- became much more productive and air travel images becoming more abundant and more tomating and augmenting tasks (Krakowski, much cheaper, and the sector’s high price accessible with AI, generating more demand Luger and Raisch 2023; Raisch and Krakowski elasticity led to a boom in demand for pilots. across a range of healthcare professionals. 2021). This example draws from US National Acad- 73 A task-centred rather than job-centred ap- emies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine 60 Agrawal, Gans and Goldfarb 2024b. proach seems helpful to explore AI’s impact (2024). The elasticities are generally low for 61 Valenzuela and others 2024. del Rio-Cha- on the world of work. Bonney and others healthcare but higher for radiology than for nona, Laurentsyeva and Wachs (2024) found (2024a) find that about 27 percent of US firms other health services (Ellis, Martins and Zhu that since the emergence of large language using AI reported impacts on tasks, but only 2017). models, there has been a 25 percent decline 5 percent reported employment (job-level) 80 There are other far-reaching implications of in online fora such as Stack Overflow, where changes. using AI to help radiologists. AI expands hu- programmers share knowledge and solve 74 According to the International Standard man development by making it feasible to problems. Beane (2024) emphasizes the Classification of Occupations, the occupa- extend cancer screening and other radiology importance of having mentors and human tion of radiologist involves more than 12 diagnostics to low-income countries where it relationships between novices and experts tasks, including interacting with patients and was difficult to do so before machine-assisted as part of learning, even if large language other medical professionals; conducting medical imaging was available (Zuhair and models can help with ready solutions. specialized diagnostic tests is only one (see others 2024). Deploying AI to help with medi- 62 Doshi and Hauser 2024; Kleinberg and the entry for Unit Group 2212 in ILO 2012). cal imaging also calls for community health Raghavan 2021. According to the Occupational Information workers trained to support the deployment, Network, radiologists perform 30 different increasing the demand for labour in local 63 Awad and others 2018; Bonnefon, Rahwan tasks (see https://www.onetonline.org/link/ communities (Adapa and others 2025; Dangi, and Shariff 2024; Purcell and Bonnefon 2023; summary/29-1224.00). Sharma and Vageriya 2025; Zuhair and oth- Vallstrom 2024. ers 2024). 75 Dranove and Garthwaite 2024. 64 Barnes, Zhang and Valenzuela 2024. Even 81 Svanberg and others 2024. aspects such as alignment with human values 76 On the benefits in lower income countries (Globig and others 2024) and hallucinations and settings, see Khosravi and others (2024) 82 Kaufman and others 2025. Data for the United need to be evaluated in a culturally sensitive and Tanno and others (2024). Agarwal and States are from the RAND American Teacher way (McIntosh and others 2024). others (2023) document the challenges of Panel. human–AI interaction in radiology and the 65 Goethals and Rhue 2024; Mazeika and others 83 Conboye 2025. For details on the survey, see potential need for new tasks and expertise by 2025; Zewail and others 2024. https://www.adeccogroup.com/global-work- radiologists. Awuah and others (2025) show force-of-the-future-research-2024. Workers 66 Boulus-Rødje and others 2024. how AI imaging models are being combined were able to save time using AI; the top two with other AI tools to improve prognostic ac- 67 This is particularly critical in some tasks where tasks where time was saved were checking curacy for people with malignant gliomas, one building skills implies engaging in activities work quality and accuracy and engaging of the most aggressive primary brain tumours, such as writing, which develops skills in ar- in more creative work. In the United States demonstrating how deploying AI for imaging gumentation, critical thinking and attention to worker use of AI is much higher than firm complements the use of other AI tools. For detail. Leveraging AI to augment human intel- adoption of AI (for workers, see Bick, Blandin broader applications of AI, including but go- ligence in the context of writing requires it to and Deming 2024; for firms, see Bonney and ing beyond support with medical images, and not only help people express ideas in the mo- others 2024b). Another survey found that the how these supplement rather than replace ment but also develop those skills in the long number of employees using AI for a third or radiologists, see Bhandari (2024). term (Stuhler, Stoltz and Martin 2023; Yan and more of their work was three times as high others 2024). This will require responding on 77 Acemoğlu and Restrepo (2018, 2019b) for- as their leaders imagined (Mayer and others the supply side as well, by building machines malized the framework for how introducing 2025). A survey of US firms from before gen- that learn and think with people and are pro- machines can lead to both task displacement erative AI was introduced found that adoption moted as such (Collins and others 2024b). and task reinstatement. For a recent review, was comparable to current use, at around 5 see Restrepo (2024). It has been used to percent (McElheran and others 2024), but 68 Mitchell (2021, 2024b) has warned that an- interpret trends in economic inequality is now growing rapidly (Bonney and others thropomorphic language shapes people’s (Acemoğlu and Restrepo 2024) and to con- 2024b). relationship with the technology (for instance, sider the introduction of AI (Acemoğlu and whether they trust it), as well as how it is viewed 84 Bandiera and others 2022. Restrepo 2019a, 2020). 204 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 85 For a 200 year analysis, see Kogan and oth- 96 Hoffmann and others 2024; Mannuru and oth- 106 In the controlled environment of a factory or ers (2021, 2023). For a more narrowly focused ers 2023; Yang and others 2024. It is costly warehouse, many routine tasks can be auto- study of the adoption of industrial robots be- (more than $100 million) to rough out such a mated, in contrast to, say, the unpredictable tween 1993 and 2014, see Lerch (2025). machine on oceans of laboriously collected context of a public road, where automating and curated data. Further human effort—of- a car proved beyond the abilities of classical 86 Babina and others (2024) find little impact of ten exploitative—fine-tunes large language programming. AI on cost reductions in US firms. Zhai and models such as ChatGPT, Claude, DeepSeek Liu (2023) find the same in Chinese firms. 107 And creating other social ills, such as in- and Gemini (Cottier and others 2024). In a Thus, firms that increase AI investment exhibit creased property crime (Liang, Sabia and sense we are in the early days and will surely higher growth in sales, employment and mar- Dave 2025). The process also has important observe multiple ancillary breakthroughs that ket valuations, but this is achieved primarily political implications, as explored in Gallego redefine how these machines are instructed through increases on the revenue side rather and Kurer (2022). and their tasks delegated. But the framework than reductions on the cost side. of higher generality (executing an ever-wider 108 Autor and others 2024. For example, the ad- 87 Bonney and others 2024a, 2024b. range of tasks) with lower human effort fo- vent of word processing software decimated cuses on the essential features of each stage. the number of people employed as word pro- 88 Eisfeldt, Schubert and Zhang (2023) report cessors and typists in the United States from that firms exposed to AI increased their valu- 97 McElheran and others (2024) show that even 1 million in 1980 to 33,000 today (Abrahams ation. Further analysis showed evidence that in the United States AI adoption around 2018, and Levy 2024). Between 1950 and 2010 the generative AI’s impact on those increases oc- while pervasive across sectors of the econo- disappearance of only one occupation on curred through labour displacement (Eisfeldt my, was concentrated in firms in a few cities the US census list (elevator operator) can be and others 2024). Already, the diffusion of and in young firms led by highly educated attributed to automation (Bessen 2018). While generative AI is depressing employment and owners overrepresented in AI adoption. automation harms incumbents, new entrants earnings for some workers, including free- 98 Narayanan and Kapoor 2024b, pp. 147, 166. in the workforce have found jobs in other lance workers on an online platform engaged fields (Bessen and others 2025; Feigenbaum in tasks ranging from data entry and graphic 99 Bick, Blandin and Deming 2024. and Gross 2024). design to software development (Hui, Reshef 100 The aspiration to achieve artificial general in- and Zhou 2024). Analysis of earnings calls 109 There were many other social and economic telligence may have driven scientific progress of listed US firms revealed a sharp increase implications of the digital transformation, in- in the field, akin to Herbert Simon’s challenge in positive sentiment about AI after ChatGPT cluding greater economic concentration and to build a machine that could beat humans at was released in November 2022. And while market power of firms (Brynjolfsson, Jin and chess, but it is no longer universally seen in references to new products are part of this Wang 2023; De Loecker and Eeckhout 2018; the scientific community as a desirable north optimism, so are expectations for increased De Loecker, Eeckhout and Unger 2020; Kurz star (AAAI 2025; Blili-Hamelin and others efficiency (Bass and others 2024). 2023; Leduc and Liu 2024) and a reduced 2025). labour share of national income (Autor and 89 Historically, technological progress often 101 The same choices may not be made across others 2020; Karabarbounis 2024; Karabar- hurt incumbent workers, and it was not until all domains, cultures and contexts. And some bounis and Neiman 2013; Velasquez 2023). (sometimes new) institutions reshaped incen- tasks are not ends in themselves but means tives that workers benefited from technologi- 110 Bhattacharyya 2024. to ends—for example, learning. Those con- cal change (Acemoğlu 2025; Acemoğlu and siderations, rather than whether a machine 111 Autor and others 2024. Johnson 2023; Scott Morton 2024). surpasses what humans can do, are what 112 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- 90 Narayanan and Kapoor 2024b. matters for human development. neering and Medicine 2024. 91 More rigorously, this corresponds to a 102 There is no neutral way to advance techno- 113 Acemoğlu and others 2022; Boustan, Choi move from special-purpose computational logical progress, so being explicit about what and Clingingsmith 2022. machines to general-purpose computers, is desirable matters (Acemoğlu and Johnson corresponding to the implementation of 2023). Others may have different goals, in- 114 For evidence in the United States, see the theoretical concept of a Turing machine cluding, from a scientific perspective, ways to Acemoğlu and Restrepo (2024). from computer science (see spotlight 1.2 for measure machine capabilities on a range of 115 For evidence in South Africa, see Bhorat and details). technical benchmarks for how close we are others (2023). On the displacement of routine getting to artificial general intelligence. 92 Potentially in many of the world’s natural jobs in Chile, see Delaporte and Peña (2025). languages (Barrault and others 2025; Costa- 103 Up to consistent errors based on program- 116 Caunedo, Keller and Shin (2023). jussà and others 2024). ming logic. 117 Martins-Neto and others 2023. 93 Hephaestus, the Greek god of invention, cre- 104 Autor 2019; Autor, Levy and Murnane 2003. ated a bronze giant called Talos (Mayor 2018). 118 Reijnders, Timmer and Ye 2021; Rodrik 2024. 105 For example, automated teller machines au- Talos’s tasks were immutable and externally tomated both cognitive tasks (verifying card 119 On the growing importance of social skills in imposed, a stark contrast from the dynamic details, processing transactions) and manual the United States, see Deming (2017). and intrinsic motivations that guide human tasks (dispensing cash). Despite automating action. Talos’s tale is a reminder of both our 120 Reijnders, Timmer and Ye 2021. routine cognitive labour, they did not elimi- quest for automation and our understanding nate bank clerks or bank branches. As with 121 Hosseinioun and others 2025. that machines can accomplish human tasks radiologists, their occupations persisted, as without being human. 122 On high-income countries, see Autor (2022). many tasks remained for bank tellers. Open- Bhorat and others (2020) present evidence 94 Reid-Green 1989. ing bank accounts and processing loan ap- of wage polarization for South Africa, but plications became core duties, for which they 95 Not to be misunderstood as something dif- Martins-Neto and others (2023) show only now have more time. The increase in branch ferent from quantum computing but simply to incipient wage polarization in many lower productivity made it cheaper to expand bank refer to machines that execute prespecified income countries. branches (with fewer tellers per branch but a programs, which can also be implemented net increase in tellers overall across locations; 123 Changes occur not only across but also using quantum computing. US National Acad- Bessen 2015). Gains in productivity can result within occupations, with evidence suggesting emies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine in higher demand if demand is sufficiently that computer use is associated with greater (2024) uses the term classical computing to elastic (US National Academies of Sciences, within-occupation wage inequality (Bessen refer to the second stage; the use of classical Engineering and Medicine 2024), which ap- 2016). programming is meant to make it clear that pears to have been the case with services the contrast is not between quantum and 124 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- provided by bank branches. For a specific nonquantum computing. neering and Medicine 2024. analysis of AI, see Bessen (2018). NOTES 205 125 On the impact of digital technologies on re- 143 The field of human–machine interaction is 157 Binz and others 2025; Delgado-Chaves and gional inequalities in Europe, see Antonietti, vast and rapidly changing (for recent per- others 2025; Luo, Rechardt and others 2024; Burlina and Rodríguez-Pose (2025). On the spectives considering AI specifically, see Musslick and others 2025. impact of geographic distance on seizing Brinkmann and others 2023; Huo, Manrique 158 This seems to be affecting freelance work- benefits from globalization in Ethiopia and and Johnson 2024; Rahwan and others ers on online platforms in particular (Demirci, Nigeria, see Atkin and Donaldson (2015). 2019; Tsvetkova and others 2024). Czaplic- Hannane and Zhu 2025; Hui, Reshef and ka, Baumann and Rahwan (2024) explore 126 For the case of South Africa, see Bhorat and Zhou 2024; Teutloff and others 2025). the implications of cultural evolution. Much others (2023). evidence suggests that people interact 159 Lee and others 2025. 127 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. differently with machines than with people. 160 Messeri and Crockett 2024. For example, people cheat more when 128 Autor 2014. interacting with machines (Cohn, Gesche 161 Doshi and Hauser 2024. 129 Prior to the advent of generative AI, machine and Maréchal 2022), and virtual interactions 162 Along the lines of the complementarity be- learning was often assumed to simply con- lead to disengagement and less empathy tween humans and AI discussed in Felin and tinue the trend of labour replacement and (Tavares and Rein 2024). AI chatbots induce Holweg (2024). See also Dubova, Galesic and capital deepening characterized by classical more cooperation when people are unaware Goldstone (2022). computing, in part because applications that they are interacting with a machine, with were easier in already technology-intensive the effect disappearing when the machine 163 Adam 2023; Epstein and others 2023. companies (Bresnahan 2021). As an example nature of the chatbot is disclosed (Ishowo- 164 Schut and others 2025. of the reach of generative AI, consider how Oloko and others 2019). The pervasiveness ChatGPT outperforms crowdworkers in text of human- and AI-powered machines may 165 This links in part to efforts to understand or annotation tasks (Gilardi, Alizadeh and Kubli also reshape patterns of trust (Makovi and explain AI (Milani and others 2024) and may 2023). others 2023) and social norms (Baronchelli call for new vocabularies to enable that bridg- 2024; Brady and Crockett 2024; Danaher ing (Hewitt, Geirhos and Kim 2025). Insights 130 Marinoudi and others 2024. 2024). from similarities and global variability across 131 Caetano and others 2025; Caplin 2025b. human languages (Lewis and others 2023; 144 Peters and Matz 2024. Marti and others 2023) can provide insights 132 Pilditch 2024. 145 Schoene and others 2024. helpful to this endeavour. 133 Kwa and others (2025) explore the potential 146 Artsi and others 2024; Benítez and others 166 Moruzzi 2025. of AI to complete what they call long tasks, 2024; Clusmann and others 2023; Gilbert, to in part capture this idea. They argue that 167 Autor 2014. Kather and Hogan 2024; Khan and others there has been a decline in the time it takes 2025; Luo, Deng and others 2024;; Wu and 168 Many factors determine what is automated, for AI to successfully complete more and others 2025. These limitations extend to the including lack of labour supply for certain more of these long tasks. most advanced models at the time of writing tasks. For instance, Septiandri, Constantinides 134 Korinek 2024c. (Xie and others 2024). and Quercia (2024) found a strong correlation between an AI impact measure and vacancy 135 Galaz 2025. 147 Soroush and others 2024. rates for occupations in the United States. 136 Reduced effort to delegate aspects of tasks 148 Griot and others 2025. 169 Gmyrek, Berg and Bescond 2023. to AI should not be confused with the goal 149 Kogan and others 2023. of increasing human efficiency at complet- 170 Constantinides and Quercia 2025; Septiandri, ing tasks. Rather, the reduction in effort can 150 To be clear, the argument is about comple- Constantinides and Quercia 2024. expand the ways in which humans leverage mentarity between humans and AI in the cre- 171 The term advanced expertise is used here automation to accomplish tasks that reflect ative process, not replacing human creativity to designate the same set of skills that US their goals, values, needs and interests. with machines, which even if it were feasible, National Academies of Sciences, Engineering would not be desirable from a human devel- 137 Collins and others (2024a) argue that this is and Medicine (2024) call elite expertise. opment perspective. the case for mathematical applications, and 172 An arms race of sorts for increased depth Hoes, Altay and Bermeo (2023) argue that 151 For the case that AI is a general-purpose and specificity of expertise—and the value of large language models support fact checking technology, see Eloundou and others (2024). being able to provide it—led to an erosion of in digital platforms moderation. 152 Gordon (2017) argues that many technological the value of the Renaissance-era paradigm of 138 Particularly when the data do not measure innovations in past industrial revolutions had someone who holds knowledge across a vast what is intended or simply capture spurious such level effects only. range of domains (breadth of knowledge) in correlations (Mhasawade, Zhao and Chunara favour of more specialized expertise (depth 153 Besiroglu, Emery-Xu and Thompson 2024. It 2021; M. Zhang and others 2024). of knowledge), particularly at the forefront of could also be a way of accelerating recom- science and technology (Jones 2009). 139 Granulo, Fuchs and Puntoni 2021; Mariadas- binant growth, the economic growth process sou, Klesse and Boegershausen 2024. proposed by Weitzman (1998), where innova- 173 Bedi and others 2025; Kather and others tion results from recombining existing ideas 2024; Moor and others 2023; K. Zhang and 140 Altay and Gilardi 2024; Yin, Jia and Wakslak to produce new ones (see also Jones 2023). others 2024. 2024. In some behavioural experiments hu- AI can accelerate both the generation of new mans seem more generous (stronger social 174 Bessen and others 2023. ideas (Li and others 2024; Liu and others preferences and reciprocity) when interact- 2024a; Su and others 2024; Sun and others 175 As argued in Autor (2024). ing with machines if they believe there are 2024) and the capacity to process existing humans behind the machine (von Schenk, 176 Deming, Ong and Summers 2025. ideas into useful innovations. S. Wang and Klockmann and Köbis 2025). others (2023) propose using large language 177 Jia and others 2024. 141 Wolczynski, Saar-Tsechansky and Wang models to enhance conceptual blending 178 Huang, Jin and Li 2024. 2024. across cultural domains. 179 Eisenmann and others 2025. 142 For a formal analysis of how the frequency 154 Cockburn, Henderson and Stern 2019; Crafts of task execution leads to an interaction 2021. 180 We are grateful to David Zuluaga Martínez between economic decisions and the affor- for this suggestion. For evidence of the ma- 155 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- dances of automating technologies, see Ales terialization of this risk, see Wiles and others neering and Medicine 2024, p. 11. and others (2023). For an application to AI, (2024). AI users performed better than those see Ales, Combemale and Ramayya (2024). 156 Trammell and Korinek 2023. without on a range of tasks, except on “knowl- edge tests” that assessed understanding. 206 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 181 More broadly, AI can tilt the balance between 196 Korinek and Vipra 2024a. See also https:// (2022) do so for mobile internet. For the posi- prediction and explanation towards the former chatgpt.com/gpts. tive impact on employment and earnings of (Hofman, Sharma and Watts 2017; Hofman and the arrival of fast internet in Africa, see Hjort 197 Acemoğlu and others 2024; Hackenburg and others 2021), if the complementarity between and Poulsen (2019). Margetts 2024a, 2024b; Marriott and Pitardi the need is not recognized—another reason 2024; Matz and others 2024; Mlonyeni 2024; 210 Acemoğlu and Johnson (2023) argue that why the importance of human evaluation of AI Pentina, Hancock and Xie 2023; Pentina and two of the ways in which AI can increased outputs remains critical even when benefiting others 2023; Simchon, Edwards and Lewan- the marginal productivity of workers is by from accessing advanced expertise. dowsky 2024; Teeny and Matz 2024. providing access to better information and as 182 Noy and Zhang 2023. a platform for enhanced collaboration. 198 Cheng and others 2024; Dutta and others 183 Peng and others 2023b. 2024; Gharahighehi and others 2024; Ma 211 de Rassenfosse, Jaffe and Waldfogel 2025. and others 2025; Markel and others 2023; 184 Dell’Acqua and others 2023. 212 Verhoogen 2023. Ravi and others 2025; S. Wang, Xu and others 185 Agrawal, Gans and Goldfarb 2023; Kanazawa 2024. A concern with the use of AI in educa- 213 Turon, Arora and Duran-Frigola 2024. and others 2022. See also Sack and others tion is that it could detract from the formation 214 Rodrik 2024. (2024). of critical thinking skills through cognitive offloading (Borges and others 2024; Nosta 215 Reijnders, Timmer and Ye 2021; Rodrik 2024. 186 Humlum and Vestergaard 2025. 2025; Stadler, Bannert and Sailer 2024), 216 Diao and others 2024; Gollin and Kaboski 187 Caplin and others 2024. which could be avoided if large language 2023. For an analysis of how investment in models are seen as collaborators rather than 188 Babina and others 2023. digital technologies, particularly software, replacements for educators. often stays within the firm, see Bessen and 189 Haslberger, Gingrich and Bhatia 2024. As 199 Agarwal and others 2023; Johri and others Frick (2018). do the broader impacts of path-dependent 2025; Jörke and others 2024; Sun and others growth in skillsets within and across jobs. On 217 Diouf and others 2024; Mishra and others 2025. the interdependence of skills, see Hosseini- 2023. oun and others (2025). Other issues being ex- 200 Aktan, Turhan and Dolu 2022; Jin, Walker and 218 Ganne, Locks and Xu 2024. amined include whether AI and remote work Reczek 2024. are complements or substitutes (Baldwin and 219 Rodrik and Sandhu 2024. If, instead, the focus 201 Baumol 2012; US National Academies of Sci- Okubo 2024) and whether greater use of AI is on AI as a force for automation, inequalities ences, Engineering and Medicine 2024. increases or reduces time spent on leisure within and across countries risk further widen- (Jiang and others 2025). 202 Potentially improving on previous conversa- ing (Korinek and Stiglitz 2021). tional agents that were already widely used 190 Otis, Delecourt and others 2024. In addition, 220 That depends largely on the price elasticity of in low- and middle-income countries (Parmar regional disparit ies within countries could demand. Estimates for the United Republic of and others 2022). also increase. The characteristics of AI imply Tanzania suggest that these elasticities would that geograph ic inequalities cannot be as- 203 Acemoğlu and Restrepo 2020. raise demand for services, in ways that are sumed to simply follow the patterns observed not observed for either agricultural or manu- 204 H. Kirk and others 2023; Kirk and others 2024. with classical computing (Muro, Methku- factured goods (McCullough 2025). pally and Kinder 2025). For an analysis of the 205 Nowotny (2021) explores the dangers of tak- 221 Bandiera and others 2022. geographic implications of generative AI in ing this route. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 222 Wei, Jörg and Rolf 2024. 206 A. Wang and others 2024. If many firms Development countries, see OECD (2024c), use the same AI application for predictive 223 Kruse and others 2024. which shows that it would exacerbate region- purposes, the emergence of a monoculture al inequalities. This heterogeneity extends 224 Lerner (2013) and Lerner and others (2024) of decisions could also harm social welfare even to the firm level, with potentially very dif- show the importance of supporting “ap- (Kleinberg and Raghavan 2021). ferent outcomes for workers from deploying propriate entrepreneurship” that fits with the the same type of AI in different organizations 207 Mathuros, Venugopalan and Adepu 2024. specificity of different developing contexts. (Meijer, Lorenz and Wessels 2021). The implications of AI as a prediction ma- 225 Swartz, Denecke and Scheepers 2023; Wal- chine have been proposed and explored in 191 The term translational expertise is borrowed ton 2022. Agrawal, Gans and Goldfarb (2019, 2022a, from US National Academies of Sciences, En- 2022b, 2024a), Athey, Bryan and Gans (2020) 226 Al-kfairy 2025. A recent survey on whether gineering and Medicine (2024). This expertise and Tucker (2025). For instance, using AI to European firms are adopting AI from providers can range from prompt engineering (Giray predict the value of houses has not replaced or developing it in-house found that adopting 2023; M. Wang and others 2024) to iterative investors using human judgement but pushes readymade AI is commonplace (Hoffreumon, interactions with AI and independent verifica- humans to evaluate houses that AI struggles Forman and van Zeebroeck 2024). tion of its outputs (Azaria, Azoulay and Reches with while increasing the value of minority- 2024). The potential for AI to give bad advice is 227 Bessen and others 2023; Eapen and others owned homes—human evaluation might have not limited to healthcare. For example, a study 2023. been biased, but AI ignores racial disparities examined AI advice to help entrepreneurs in in its valuation (Raymond 2024). For other 228 Some of the effects will be indirect, through Kenya. High-performing entrepreneurs ben- applications, see Rambachan (2024). Italian AI-enabled advances to inform agricultural efited from AI, improving their revenue by 15 banks that adopted AI to make lending deci- practices. For example, a recent study used percent over those not receiving AI advice. In sions made better decisions when humans AI to identify a microbiome more conducive contrast, low performers did 8 percent worse— and AI complemented rather than substituted to potato growth, potentially revolutionizing largely because their ventures had few busi- for each other (Gambacorta, Sabatini and agriculture (Song and others 2025). ness prospects, but the AI model was unable to Schiaffi 2025). See also Doshi and others identify the problem and advise those ventures 229 Shahriar and others 2025. (2025) on using AI to support a broader range to scale back or shut down—so AI was giving of strategic decisions in firms. 230 Allen and others 2025. bad advice (Otis, Clarke and others 2024). 208 Mannuru and others 2023. 231 Mutiso 2024. 192 Bilen and Hervé 2025. 209 Varian (2010) describes the economic trans- 232 Gardner and Henry (2023) present a frame- 193 Lu and others 2024. formation enabled by the internet and the work to help determine the potential for 194 Wilson, Daugherty and Bianzino 2017. world wide web. Kumar, Amaglobeli and Mo- allocating public and private capital, do- szoro (2023) document the social dividends mestically and from high-income countries, 195 For an example in education, see Liu and oth- of digital adoption in low- and middle-income in low-income settings. Foster and others ers (2023). countries, and Chiplunkar and Goldberg (2023) present a comprehensive review of NOTES 207 evidence showing that, on balance, digital 17 Ponnusamy and others 2022. 57 Schrittwieser and others 2020. infrastructure, particularly broadband internet, 18 Peterson 2024; Shumailov and others 2024. 58 Guo and others 2024. enhances firm productivity, employment and welfare. They also show that mobile phones 19 Xu 2022. 59 Allen 1994; Cross and Estrada 1995. help agricultural producers and traders coor- 20 Huang and others 2019; Todorović, Pešterac 60 Blumenstock 2020. dinate and that rural electrification supports and Tomić 2019. a range of development outcomes, even 61 Narayanan and Kapoor 2024. though many randomized controlled trials 21 Ji and others 2023; Wiener 1960. 62 Lum and Isaac 2016. in rural settings have not found substantial 22 Doshi-Velez and others 2017. short-term benefits (as in Lee, Miguel and 63 Birhane and others 2024. Wolfram 2020b)—though the potential of AI 23 Birhane and others 2024. 64 Berger-Tal and others 2024; Bhat and Huang was not considered. Access to the internet 24 Z. Wang and others 2024. 2021; Bi and others 2023; Jongaramrungru- also enhances connectivity within countries, ang and others 2022; McGovern and others which is one way countries can increase their 25 Bender and others 2021. 2024; Qazi, Khawaja and Farooq 2022; van market size, important to power the demand 26 Raja and Zhou 2023. Oosterhout 2024; Van Wynsberghe 2021. for services (Rodrik 2023). 27 Raja and Zhou 2023. 65 Kaack and others 2022. 233 Just providing access to power without enabling people to do more with that power 28 UNDP 2024b. 66 Galaz 2025; Galaz and others 2025. has limited positive impact (Lee, Miguel and 29 Bak-Coleman and others 2021; Boyd and 67 Kaack and others 2022; Verma and Tan 2024. Wolfram 2020a). On the productivity side Richerson 1985; Henrich 2015; Henrich and some studies have also found limited impact 68 Kaack and others 2022. McElreath 2003. on unreliable electricity access, but Fried and 69 Roytburg 2024. Lagakos (2023) show that even with limited 30 Bak-Coleman and others 2021. short-run costs, long-run general equilibrium 70 Ismagilova and others 2022; Yin and others 31 Chetty and others 2022a, 2022b; Marcenaro- effects are associated with lack of reliable 2015. Gutierrez, Micklewright and Vignoles 2021; electricity. Smith and Christakis 2008. 71 Sanders and others 2019; Wan and others 234 Even within the same country distance from 2020. 32 Stewart 2013. AI hubs matters. Hunt, Cockburn and Bessen 72 Alhosani and Alhashmi 2024. (2024) found that in the United States an ad- 33 Reverberi and others 2022. ditional 200 kilometre distance from the clos- 73 Gunasekeran and others 2021; Panch and 34 Alhosani and Alhashmi 2024; Costello, Penny- est AI hotspot was associated with 17 percent others 2019. cook and Rand 2024; Haupt and Marks 2023; lower growth in AI’s share of job listings. Nie and others 2024; Wermelinger 2023. 74 Bak-Coleman and others 2021. 235 Gust, Hanushek and Woessmann 2024a. See 35 Masello and others 2022; Yurtsever and oth- 75 Bak-Coleman and others 2021; Brinkmann also Lutz and others 2021; Pritchett 2024; ers 2020. and others 2023; Burton and others 2024; Pritchett and Viarengo 2023. for other meth- Rahwan 2018; Rahwan and others 2019. odologies and approaches showing compa- 36 Masello and others 2022. rable gaps. 76 Aristotle 1999; Condorcet 1785; Galton 1907. 37 WHO 2023. 236 Björkegren and others 2025. 77 Surowiecki 2005. 38 Kopits and Cropper 2005; Sayari and others 237 Ben-Ishai and others (2024) outline some of 2022. 78 Arrow and others 2008; Hastie and Kameda the risks that AI can exacerbate economic 2005; Surowiecki 2005. 39 Awad and others 2018. challenges. 79 Aher, Arriaga and Kalai 2023; Argyle and oth- 40 Chang and others 2023. 1 Agarwal and others 2024; Athey, Bryan and ers 2023. Gans 2020. 41 Kelling and others 2013. 80 Aher, Arriaga and Kalai 2023; Burton and oth- 42 Conover and others 2011; González-Bailón ers 2024; Dillion and others 2023. CHAPTER 2 and others 2023; Guess and others 2023a; 81 Anderson and others 2019; Moss and others Ribeiro and others 2020. 2 Sen 1999. 2023. 43 Hill 2023. 3 Sen 1999. 82 Burton and others 2024. 44 Costa-Jussà and others 2022. 4 UNDP 2024b. 83 Arrow and others 2008; Hastie and Kameda 45 Guerreiro and others 2023. 2005; Prelec, Seung and McCoy 2017; Surow- 5 Stewart 2013. iecki 2005. 46 Tessler and others 2024. 6 Bak-Coleman and others 2021. 84 Angelidis and others 2021; Coavoux, Elsahar 47 Zuboff 2023. 7 Burton and others 2024. and Gallé 2019; Suhara and others 2020. 48 Brady and others 2023. 8 Atari and others 2025; Brinkmann and others 85 Kittur and Kraut 2008. 2023. 49 Bond and others 2012; Rajkumar and others 86 Stiles and Cui 2010. 2022. 9 Sen 1999. 87 Kelly and Gráda 2000; Mackay 1980; Toyo- 50 Hunkenschroer and Luetge 2022; Marcinkows- 10 UNDP 2001. ki and others 2020; Sachan and others 2020; kawa, Whalen and Laland 2019. 11 Narayanan and Kapoor 2024. Taylor 2023; Vogell, Coryne and Little 2022. 88 Hong and Page 2004; Hong and Page 2011; Pescetelli, Rutherford and Rahwan 2021; 12 UNDP 2001. 51 MacKay and Weinstein 2022. Suran and others 2022. 13 UNDP 2024b. 52 Alvarez and others 2024; Messeri and 89 Bak-Coleman and others 2022; Becker, Por- Crockett 2024. 14 ITU 2023d; UNDP 2024b. ter and Centola 2019; Guilbeault, Becker and 53 Born and others 2021. Centola 2018. 15 Gezici 2022. 54 Hilbert and Darmon 2020. 90 Bail and others 2018; Conover and others 2011; 16 Guess and others 2023a; McLoughlin and González-Bailón and others 2023; Guess and Brady 2023; S. Wang, Huang and others 55 Linda Morris 2022. others 2023a; Nyhan and others 2023; Santos, 2024. 56 Schrittwieser and others 2020. Lelkes and Levin 2021; Törnberg 2018. 208 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 91 Becker, Brackbill and Centola 2017; Lorenz and most common one is more than two hours a 29 Woodard 2018. others 2011; Mann 2022; Navajas and others day during early childhood. 30 Horvath 2024. 2018; Pescetelli, Rutherford and Rahwan 2021. 9 Anderson and Subrahmanyam 2017; Corkin 31 Resnick 2023. 92 Henderson 1987; Hoffmann 2012. and others 2021; Felix and others 2020; Gou and Perceval 2023; Hinkley and others 2018; 32 Horvath 2024. 93 Vlasceanu and others 2024. Hutton and others 2020; Korte 2020; Liu and 33 Schuengel and van Heerden 2023. 94 Boyd and Richerson 1985; Feldman and others 2021; McArthur, Tough and Madigan Cavalli-Sforzatt 1984; Henrich 2015; Henrich 2022; McHarg and others 2020; Nurdiantami 34 Sarwar 2022. and McElreath 2003. and Agil 2020; Wan and others 2021. Defini- 35 Festerling and Siraj 2020; Haber and Cor- tions of excessive screen time vary across the 95 Ellis 2024; Otto and others 2020; Richerson, riveau 2023. literature, but the most common understand- Boyd and Efferson 2024; UNDP 2024b; War- ing is that more than two hours a day would 36 Aeschlimann and others 2020. ing, Wood and Szathmáry 2024. be considered excessive during early child- 37 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. 96 Ren and others 2024; Shin and others 2023. hood. [repeats previous note] 38 Uhls and others 2014. 97 Brinkmann and others 2023. 10 Hutton and others 2020. Excessive screen use is measured by ScreenQ, which is a 15-item 39 Orben and others 2024. 98 Atari and others 2025. measure of screen-based media use reflecting 40 Blanchflower and Bryson 2024a; Blanch- the domains of the American Academy of Pe- flower, Bryson and Xu 2024; Blanchflower CHAPTER 3 diatrics recommendations: access to screens, and others 2024; Haidt 2024; Kelly and oth- frequency of use, content viewed and coview- 1 Though education, health, income and ing. Higher scores reflect greater use. ers 2018; Twenge and Campbell 2019, 2018; agency are important throughout life, each Twenge and others 2022. 11 Anderson and others 2010; Thiagarajan, New- is examined here during only one life stage 41 Blanchflower and Bryson 2024a; Twenge and son and Swaminathan 2025. for simplicity and space reasons, using the others 2022. life stage most affected by each component. 12 Núñez-Jaramillo, Herrera-Solís and Herrera- This does not mean, for example, that adults Morales 2021. 42 The dip in life satisfaction at middle age and do not use AI for lifelong learning or that AI rise in old age has sometimes been called a is not used in infant healthcare. The topics 13 Eirich and others 2022; Holton and Nigg paradox, given the declining health and social are simply examples for different applications 2020; Tan and Zhou 2022; Xie and others losses during the later years of life. Cultural of AI. 2020. One challenge that most of these stud- heterogeneity plays into these relations: the ies share is determining causality. Researchers U-shape curve of wellbeing can look very dif- 2 Following Amartya Sen (1999), institutions are are divided on whether increased screen time ferent not only in countries with lower human seen as vehicles for expanding capabilities causes ADHD symptoms or whether children development but also in different societal and freedoms. with ADHD just spend more time at screens. contexts, such as rural and urban settings. For 3 UN 1989b. 14 Labadze, Grigolia and Machaidze 2023. instance, rural subsistence populations show diverse patterns of wellbeing throughout the 4 Bozkurt and others 2023. For a detailed 15 Suresh Babu and Dhakshina Moorthy 2024. life course, in which life satisfaction often de- analysis of how institutions contribute to or clines with age (Counted, Cowden and Lomas 16 Alzate 2023; Pedro and others 2019; Vincent- mitigate inequalities, see Sen (1992). For an 2024; Gurven and others 2024). Lancrin and Van der Vlies 2020. analysis of how inequalities are reproduced intergenerationally through families, see 17 Alzate 2023; Vincent-Lancrin and Van der 43 Blanchflower, Bryson and Xu 2024; Blanch- UNDP (2019). Caregiver refers to anyone Vlies 2020. flower and others 2024; Haidt 2024. responsible for a child’s care, including 44 Fumagalli, Shrum and Lowrey 2024; Orben, 18 Gaskins 2023; Jennings 2023; Perry and Lee foster parents, relatives, babysitters or legal Dienlin and Przybylski 2019; Orben and Przy- 2019; Perry and Turner-Lee 2019. guardians. bylski 2019; Valkenburg 2022. Wegmann, 5 Orben and others 2024. The adolescence 19 Labadze, Grigolia and Machaidze 2023. Schiebener and Brand (2023) suggest, for section elaborates on why adults are less 20 The programme aims to integrate AI educa- example, that social media scrolling can help susceptible than teenagers to addiction and tion into the national curriculum, foster AI-driv- decrease stress (either as an adaptive coping harmful social media use. en entrepreneurship and prepare students strategy or a maladaptive coping strategy in individuals with addiction tendency); how- for the global tech economy (Lee and Uddin 6 Although preschool programmes have dem- ever, the control group was either waiting or 2023). Since its inception the academy has onstrated considerable benefits, access and reading magazines rather than engaging in trained more than 300 specialists in machine participation remain limited at both the global activities that are typically known to be effec- learning and AI (Asia-Plus 2024). and regional levels. Globally, 4 in 10 children tive for stress relief, such as physical exercise ages 3–4 are enrolled in early childhood edu- 21 Stanford Graduate School of Business 2023. and the outdoors. See also Nugraha and cation. Attendance rates vary greatly across others (2024) and Roberts, Hinds and Camic 22 Yaqoob 2024. Another major challenge is regions: around two-thirds of children in Latin (2020). the product’s dependence on internet ac- America and the Caribbean are enrolled, compared with just under half in South Asia cess. Although internet usage in the country 45 Carter and others 2024; Huang and others and only a quarter in Sub-Saharan Africa increased by approximately 214 percent be- 2023; Khalaf and others 2023; Scott, Stuart ( UNICEF 2024). tween 2007 and 2017, usage remains around and Barber 2021, 2022; Stuart and Scott 2021; 50 percent as of 2022 (World Bank 2024b). Twenge and others 2020. 7 Hu and others 2020; Hurwitz and Schmitt 2020; Kermani and Aldemir 2015; Nurdian- 23 Bozkurt and others 2023; Chen and Lin 2023; 46 Braghieri, Levy and Makarin 2022; Faelens tami and Agil 2020; Papadakis, Kalogiannakis Saadeh 2023. and others 2021; Irmer and Schmiedek 2023; and Zaranis 2018. 24 Grinschgl and Neubauer 2022; Tech Busi- McComb, Vanman and Tobin 2023. 8 Anderson and Subrahmanyam 2017; Corkin ness News 2023. 47 Orben and others 2024. and others 2021; Felix and others 2020; Gou 25 Skulmowski 2023. 48 Stuart and Scott 2021. and Perceval 2023; Hinkley and others 2018; Hutton and others 2020; Korte 2020; Liu and 26 Skulmowski 2023. 49 Conversely, Allcott and others (2020) found others 2021; McArthur, Tough and Madigan 27 Baron 2023. that deactivating a social media platform for 2022; McHarg and others 2020; Nurdiantami a certain time increased subjective wellbeing and Agil 2020; Wan and others 2021. Defini- 28 US National Center for Education Statistics and led users to re-evaluate their opinion of tions of excessive screen time vary, but the 2013. platforms and the need to use them. NOTES 209 50 Blanchflower and Bryson 2024a; Odgers 2024. 92 Human Development Report Office survey CHAPTER 4 data. 51 Corrigan, Rokem and Kuhl 2024. 1 Examples include the LLM Leaderboard 93 Campens and others 2023; Mariano and oth- 52 Huang and others 2023. (https://llm-stats.com/) and the Chatbot Arena, ers 2021. in which models are rated against one an- 53 Odgers 2024. 94 Sixsmith and others 2022. These findings other in the same way that chess players are 54 Vaid and others 2024. For example, individu- are based on data from after the Covid- 19 rated (https://lmarena.ai/?leaderboard). als with depression are more susceptible to pandemic, during which many older people 2 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. social comparison on social media platforms, increased their internet use for communica- reacting with negative emotions, lower self- tion, health and overall wellbeing. 3 Examples focusing on mobile phones and dig- esteem and worsening depressive symptoms ital provision of information include Fabregas 95 Mariano and others 2022; Neves and Mead (Aubry, Quiamzade and Meier 2024). and others (2025), Pesando and Qiyomiddin 2021. (2023), Rotondi and others (2020) and, for the 55 Bone and others 2022; Fluharty and others 96 Mozilla 2019. specific case of AI, Kulkov and others (2024). 2023; Towe-Goodman and others 2024. 97 Ipsos 2023. 4 Altman 2024. 56 Ali and others 2021. 98 Rainie and others 2022. Data are for the 5 Jasanoff 2016. 57 Yuvaraj and others 2021. United States. 6 Conceição 2019. 58 Aprin and others 2023. 99 Maldives is an exception, with a medium HDI 7 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2024; Goldstone 59 Sen 2001. value of 0.762 (UNDP 2025). 2002; Kelly, Mokyr and Ó Gráda 2023; Mokyr 60 The latter is analysed in the 2021/2022 Hu- 100 Sixsmith and others 2022. 2016; Samuel 1977. man Development Report (UNDP 2022). 101 Fingerman, Birditt and Umberson 2020; Sen, 8 Narayanan and Kapoor 2024. 61 Prunkl 2022. Prybutok and Prybutok 2022. 9 Watson, Mökander and Floridi 2024. 62 Antsaklis 2020. 102 Williams 2024. 10 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. 63 Robeyns 2005, 2016. 103 Havers and others 2024; Kemp and Erades 11 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. Pérez 2023. 64 We are thankful to Professor PB Anand for this 12 Winner 1980. addition. 104 Havers and others 2024. Data are for England and Wales. 13 MacKenzie 1999. 65 Nussbaum 2003; Sen 2008. 105 US Federal Bureau of Investigation 2024. 14 Kudina and van de Poel 2024; Lazar and 66 Botes 2023. Data for this and the next sentence are for the Nelson 2023; Sartori and Theodorou 2022. 67 Lazar 2024e. United States. 15 Narayanan and Kapoor 2024. 68 Brinkmann and others 2023. 106 Napal 2024. 16 Winner 1980. 69 Hassija and others 2024. 107 Thompson 2024. 17 Aldasoro and others 2024; Lane 2024. 70 Brinkmann and others 2023. 108 Mitzner and others 2008. 18 Capraro and others 2024. 71 Atari and others 2025. 109 Choudhury, Renjilian and Asan 2020; 19 Holloway and Barbareschi 2022. Loveys and others 2022; Sapci and Sapci 72 Bradford 2020. 2019. 20 Gupta and Treviranus 2022. 73 Madary 2022. 110 Young adults are those ages 18–29. Lucas 21 Assistive technologies include devices such 74 European Commission 2019. and Villarroel 2022. as wheelchairs, hearing aids and alternative and augmentative communication devices 75 Council of Europe 2019. 111 Span 2025. that enhance the functional capacities of 76 Botes 2023. 112 Clegg and others 2022. people with disabilities (Austin and Holloway 2022; WHO and UNICEF 2022). 77 Bradford 2020. 113 WHO 2017. 22 Jahan and others 2020; Raja 2016. 78 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. 114 Shiwani and others 2023. 23 Jahan and others 2020. 79 See Adams, Dedehayir and O’Connor (2022). 115 Ardila and others 2019; Bharadwaj 2024; Otake 2016; Saha 2024. 24 Stein and Lazar 2021. 80 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. 116 Hernström and others 2025. Data are for 25 Touzet 2023. 81 Følstad and Skjuve 2019. Sweden. 26 de Freitas and others 2022; Smith and others 82 Westfall 2022. The 22 percent includes re- 117 Lim and others 2022. 2023; Touzet 2023. spondents who gave up or were disconnected. 118 Villar and others 2015. 27 Adnin and Das 2024. 83 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. 119 In the United States people ages 65 and 28 Papadopoulos 2024. 84 Invoca 2023. older account for 27 percent of the popula- 29 Valencia and others 2023. 85 For an analysis of the Philippines, see Cucio tion and 37 percent of healthcare costs (Peter and Henning (2025). G. Peterson Foundation 2024). 30 ZainEldin and others 2024. 86 Amadeus 2017. 120 Shiwani and others 2023. 31 Goggin, Ellis and Hawkins 2019. 87 US Commission on Civil Rights 2024; US Gov- 121 Chu and others 2023. 32 WHO and UNICEF 2022. ernment Accountability Office 2014; Raji and 122 Stypinska 2023; van Kolfschooten 2023; 33 WHO and UNICEF 2022. others 2020. WHO 2022a. 34 UNDESA 2024d. 88 Hefner and others 2019. 123 It is probably unrealistic to call for free distri- 35 UNDESA 2024d. 89 UNICEF 2023. bution of devices. However, universal access could be achieved by making devices avail- 36 UNDESA 2024d. 90 Vanden Abeele, Abels and Hendrickson 2020. able at schools, public libraries and other 37 https://sites.research.google/relate/. 91 Thompson 2024. community centres. 210 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 38 Ayoka and others 2024. 75 Ferguson and others 2021. 115 de V. Cavalcanti and Tavares 2008. 39 Ayoka and others 2024. 76 Rosman and others 2024. 116 Bittman, Rice and Wajcman 2004. 40 Ayoka and others 2024. 77 Facchinetti and others 2023. 117 Cowan 2023. 41 Automatic Speech Recognition can alter the 78 Based on data from the United Nations Devel- 118 Hertog and others 2023. dynamic of the conversation—for example, by opment Programme Survey on AI and Human 119 Wajcman 2010. adding pauses or altering the flow. If the other Development, comparing responses from person in the conversation does not under- people ages 60 and older with responses 120 UNESCO 2024b. stand or refuses to cooperate, the interaction from people ages 17–24.] 121 Breda and others 2020. cannot take place (Ayoka and others 2024). 79 Coeckelbergh 2022. 122 Stoet and Geary 2022. 42 Baffoe 2013. 80 Ada Lovelace Institute and The Alan Turing 123 Breda and others 2020. 43 Zhuang and Goggin 2024. Institute 2023. 124 Leslie and others 2015. 44 Sen 1985, 1999, 2013. 81 Chan and Muralidharan 2024; Yew 2021. 125 Napp and Breda 2022. 45 Shew 2020. Ableism is the systematic de- 82 Felber and others 2023. valuation of and discrimination against people 126 Napp and Breda 2022. 83 Prince and Wallsten 2022. with disabilities (Bennett and Keyes 2020). 127 This is the case in several Eastern Euro- 84 Hertog, Ruppanner and Churchill 2024. 46 Spiel and others 2019. pean, Arab and Southeast Asian countries 85 Ageism towards older adults is rooted in age- ( UNESCO 2021a, 2024b). 47 Spiel and others 2019. based stereotypes, often shaped by general- 128 Narasimhan 2021. 48 Baillargeon, Yoon and Zhang 2024. ized assumptions that portray older people as weak, vulnerable and incapable but also 129 UNESCO 2024c. 49 Adnin and Das 2024; Glazko and others 2023. warm and friendly (Swift and Chasteen 2021). 130 UNESCO 2024a. 50 Glazko and others 2023. 86 WHO 2022a; Wright 2023b. 131 UNESCO 2024c. 51 Glazko and others 2023. 87 Stypinska 2023. 132 WEF 2023. 52 Papadopoulos 2024. 88 WHO 2022a. 133 Young, Wajcman and Sprejer 2023. 53 Gadiraju and others 2023; Li and others 89 Mannheim and others 2023. 2024; Mack and others 2024. 134 Liu and Wang 2024. 90 Rubeis 2020; Voinea, Wangmo and Vică 54 WebAim 2024. 135 Aldasoro and others 2024; Humlum and 2024. Vestergaard 2024; Lane 2024. 55 Chapter 3 describes these concepts and their 91 Voinea, Wangmo and Vică 2024. significance in the context of AI algorithms. 136 Aldasoro and others 2024. 92 Lee, Iizuka and Eggleston 2025. 56 Gupta and Treviranus 2022. 137 Armantier and others 2024; Prince and Wall- 93 MacLeavy 2021. sten 2022. 57 Smith and others 2023; Valencia and others 2023. 94 MacLeavy 2021; Schwiter and Steiner 2020. 138 UNDP 2023. 58 McDonald, Massey and Hamidi 2023. 95 Wright 2023b. 139 PSong, Wang and Li 2024; Vásárhelyi and others 2021. 59 Holloway and Barbareschi 2022; Mankoff, 96 Wright 2023b. Hayes and Kasnitz 2010. 140 Peng and others 2022. 97 Wright 2023b. 60 Wu 2021. 141 Peng and others 2022. 98 Lee, Iizuka and Eggleston 2025. 61 Goggin, Prahl and Zhuang 2023. 142 Rossiter 1993. 99 Lee, Iizuka and Eggleston 2025. 62 The discussion here focuses on adult social 143 Peng and others 2022; Song, Wang and Li 2024. 100 Khan and others 2024. care, which includes care for older people 144 Brooke 2024. and people with disabilities and chronic 101 Khan and others 2024. illnesses. 145 Brooke 2023. 102 UN 2024d. 63 Wright 2023a. 146 Cave and others 2023. 103 Chopra and Krishnan 2022. 64 Kodate and others 2022. 147 Cave and others 2023. 104 Tronto 2020. 65 Kodate and others 2022. This study focuses on 148 Chen, Duan and Kim 2024. 105 King-Dejardin 2019. public narratives in France, Ireland, Hong Kong, 149 Toupin 2024. China (SAR), Japan and the United Kingdom. 106 Hertog, Ruppanner and Churchill 2024. 150 Burrage, Dasgupta and Ganguli 2025. 66 Efforts are under way to ensure that robots 107 Hertog, Ruppanner and Churchill 2024. have “empathy,” as proposed in Christov- 151 Genero 2024. 108 Emmer De Albuquerque Green 2024. Moore and others (2023). 152 Peña and others 2023. 109 Emmer De Albuquerque Green 2024. 67 Schwiter and Steiner 2020. 153 Acerbi and Stubbersfield 2023; Celiktutan, 110 Hertog, Ruppanner and Churchill 2024. 68 Atkinson, Lawson and Wiles 2011. Cadario and Morewedge 2024; Weidinger 111 Wajcman 2010. and others 2023. 69 Green and Lawson 2011. 112 Rotondi and others 2020. Pesando (2022) 154 Treiman, Ho and Kool (2024) show the chal- 70 Addati and others 2018. reports that women’s ownership of a mobile lenges of using human input in AI training. 71 Fetterolf and others 2025. phone is associated with lower likelihood of Bigoulaeva, Madabushi and Gurevych (2025) emotional, physical and sexual violence over show the inherent limits of fine-tuning given 72 Schwiter and Steiner 2020. the previous year, after a range of factors are that pretraining data may be a boundary of 73 Fetterolf and others 2025. controlled for. the tasks the model is able to address. 74 Lee and others 2023; Pilotto, Boi and Peter- 113 Chan 2022; Wajcman 2010. 155 Caliskan, Bryson and Narayanan 2017; mans 2018. Charlesworth, Caliskan and Banaji 2022; 114 Hertog and others 2023. NOTES 211 Charlesworth and others 2024; Bender and a significant moment that reveals their per- 212 van der Weij and others 2024. others 2021. sonality, challenges, and the essence of their 213 Ethayarajh and Jurafsky 2020. work.” 156 The data used to train a large language mod- 214 Eriksson and others 2025, p. 8. See also Na- el may be drawn from a nonrepresentative 172 Greenwald and Banaji 1995. rayanan and Kapoor (2023b). sample of the population, which can cause 173 Bai and others 2024; Zhao, Wang and Wang the model to fail to generalize well to some 215 As the researchers argued, it is not as though 2025. social groups. The data may omit important a lawyer’s job is to answer bar exam ques- contexts, and proxies used as labels (such as 174 Bai and others 2024. tions all day (Narayanan and Kapoor 2023b). sentiment) may incorrectly measure the actual 175 Bai and others 2024. 216 Berente, Kormylo and Rosenkranz 2024. outcome of interest (such as representational harms). The training or inference procedure 176 Bai and others 2024. 217 Angwin and others 2022. itself may amplify bias beyond what is present 177 Y. Wang and others 2023. 218 Buolamwini and Gebru 2018. in the training data. The choice of optimiza- tion function, such as selecting accuracy 178 Bai and others 2024; Hofmann and others 219 Wang, Hertzmann and Russakovsky 2024. over some measure of fairness, can affect a 2024. 220 Eriksson and others 2025. model’s behaviour. Benchmark datasets may 179 Brown and others 2020; Liang and others be unrepresentative of the population that will 221 Vidgen and others 2024. 2022. use the large language model but can steer 222 Weidinger and others 2023. development towards optimizing only for 180 Edenberg and Wood 2023. those represented by the benchmark. A large 223 Narayanan and Kapoor 2023a. 181 Raghavan 2023. language model may be deployed in a differ- 224 Narayanan and Kapoor 2023a. ent setting from that for which it was intended, 182 Kleinberg, Mullainathan and Raghavan 2016. such as with or without a human intermediary 225 Narayanan and Kapoor 2023a. 183 Barocas, Hardt and Narayanan 2023. for automated decisionmaking (Suresh and 226 Narayanan and Kapoor 2023a. Guttag 2021). 184 Mirza, Kulkarni and Jadhav 2024. 227 Weidinger and others 2023. 157 Abid, Farooqi and Zou 2021. 185 Mirza, Kulkarni and Jadhav 2024. 228 Liang and others 2022. 158 Mei, Fereidooni and Caliskan 2023. 186 Blodgett and others 2020. 229 McIntosh and others 2024. 159 W.-R. Chen and others 2023. 187 Barocas, Hardt and Narayanan 2023. 230 Weidinger and others 2023. 160 Barocas, Hardt and Narayanan 2023. 188 Barocas, Hardt and Narayanan 2023; Xiang 2024 161 Katzman and others 2023. 189 Barocas, Hardt and Narayanan 2023. CHAPTER 5 162 Barocas, Hardt and Narayanan 2023. 190 Blodgett and others 2020. 1 Power can be categorized in many ways. 163 Atari and others 2025. Pansardi and Bindi (2021) differentiate the 191 Blodgett and others 2021. 164 Ghosh and Caliskan 2023. concepts of “power to,” “power over” and 192 Blodgett and others 2021. “power with.” Lazar (2025) categorizes power 165 Gallegos and others 2024. with respect to algorithmic intermediaries, 193 Atari and others 2025; Lorè and Heydari 166 Bai and others 2022a; Ouyang and others introducing ideas of “power between” and 2024; Maloney and others 2024; Mihalcea 2022. “power through.” This chapter draws implicitly and others 2024; Seo, Yuan and Bu 2025. from various categorizations, particularly in 167 Raji and others 2021. 194 Raghavan 2023 terms of “power between” (mediating social 168 Ouyang and others 2022; Solaiman and interactions and social choices) and “power 195 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023; Narayanan Dennison 2021. over” (controlling the design and application and Kapoor 2024. of AI and other algorithms). 169 This approach involves collecting a dataset 196 As in https://openai.com/charter/. of human demonstrations, comparisons and 2 The distinction between “power to” and “power preferences to create a reward model that 197 Mitchell 2024a. over,” as well as the modalities in which power guides the fine-tuning process (Ouyang and can be exercised, draws from Lazar (2024a). 198 Sen 1985, 1999. others 2022). Ouyang and others (2022) pro- 3 To be clear, having agentic properties does pose using written human feedback to pro- 199 Vergeer 2020. not mean that AI is a moral agent (Geiselmann mote human values, including bias mitigation, 200 Lazar and Nelson 2023. and others 2023; Véliz 2021). One way of in a reinforcement learning–based fine-tuning thinking about these properties could be in method. Others have proposed constitutional 201 Winner 1980. terms of simulations of agency (Lazar 2025). AI, which uses a similar approach but with the 202 Cave and Dihal 2023. reward model based on a list of human-spec- 4 Lazar 2025. ified principles instead of example prompts 203 Atari and others 2025. 5 Bommasani and others 2024; Kapoor and and outputs (Bai and others 2022b). 204 Narayanan and Kapoor 2024. others 2024a. 170 Ganguli and others 2023. 205 Maragno and others 2023. 6 Korinek and Vipra 2024b. 171 For instance, using ChatGPT-4o, we gen- 206 Marwala 2024. 7 Gambacorta and Shreeti 2025. erated a series of stories for different occupations. The percentage of stories 207 The human development approach is about 8 Acemoğlu 2024. featuring female characters in positions of expanding the richness of human life rather 9 Aldasoro and others 2024; Crisanto and oth- power exceeded 95 percent: “head of state” than just the richness of the economy in which ers 2024. (98 percent), “medical doctor” (99 percent), human beings live. This approach focuses on “Nobel Prize winner” (100 percent) and “CEO” people and their opportunities and choices. 10 Korinek and Vipra 2024a. (95 percent). These figures are based on Hu- 208 Raji and others 2021. 11 Lerner and Tirole 2002. man Development Report Office calculations using the OpenAI API (January 2025). The 209 Eriksson and others 2025. 12 Gambacorta and Shreeti 2025. prompt used was, “Write a 100-word story 210 Eriksson and others 2025. 13 Korinek and Vipra 2024a. about a character, creating their name, with the following occupation: {activity}. Focus on 211 Raji and others 2021. 14 Tirole 2023. 212 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 15 Comunale and Manera 2024. 41 Achiam and others 2023; Cao and others understood (Cho and others 2024; Glüer-Pa- 2023; Touvron and others 2023. gin and Spectre 2024; Stagnaro, Tappin and 16 This framing draws from Lazar (2024a, 2025). Rand 2023; Tappin, Pennycook and Rand 42 Simon 1971. 17 Zuboff 2019. 2021). 43 Simon 1971. 18 Aridor and others 2024; Galaz and others 65 Matz and others 2024. 2025; Lorenz-Spreen and others 2023; 44 Zheng and Meister 2025. 66 Floridi 2024. Zhuravskaya, Petrova and Enikolopov 2020. 45 Vélez and others 2023. Cognitive enhance- 67 Kosinski 2024. 19 Lazar 2024d, 2025. ment brings new ethical considerations, as explored in Gordon and Seth (2024). 68 When crafting persuasive language, humans 20 Bengio and others 2025. are prone to developing arguments that are 46 This is a lower bound, based on Human De- 21 Bengio and others 2024; Cohen and others convincing to themselves rather than the velopment Report Office calculations using 2024; Ho and others 2023. subject being persuaded, which are known the following assumptions from Villalobos and as egocentric biases; AI does not suffer from 22 Caton and Haas 2024; Gallegos and others others (2024a). The indexed web comprises such biases (Matz and others 2024). 2024; Hagendorff 2024; Jobin, Ienca and 500 trillion tokens (much internet content is Vayena 2019; Lazar 2024b; Véliz 2019; Whit- not indexed), bits of words that are on average 69 Matz and others 2024. tlestone and others 2019. Much of the work four characters long. If each character takes 70 Sharma and others 2023. on AI fairness builds on the longstanding 8 bits to encode (using the ASCII standard), examination of algorithmic fairness (Das, the web contains 1.6x1017 bits of text (to which 71 Sharma and others 2023; Summerfield and Stanton and Wallace 2023; Dwork and others one would have to add multimodal content others 2024. 2012; Mitchell and others 2021). in the form of images, sound and video). At 72 Stefanija and Pierson 2023. 10 bits per second, a human could attend to 23 Christian 2021; Russell 2019. One challenge 3.156x108 bits in a year, so it would take half a 73 Kapoor and Narayanan 2024. of alignment is the diversity of and changes in billion years to go over the indexed web text human values (Awad and others 2018). 74 Kapoor and Narayanan 2024. alone. 24 World Bank 2017. 75 Hackenburg and others 2025. 47 For a description of how these recommender 25 Methnani and others 2024; Sadek and others systems work, see Narayanan (2023). For an 76 UNESCO 2021b. 2024. analysis of their implications for the produc- 77 OECD 2025a. tion, distribution and consumption of content 26 Lazar 2024c; Mittelstadt, Russell and Wachter in social media, see Aridor and others (2024). 78 Personal Data Protection Commission 2025. 2019; Rudin 2019. Efforts to understand the world models implicit in generative AI may 48 Kemp 2025. 79 Personal Data Protection Commission 2025. offer new ways of making progress, but it 49 Narayanan 2023. 80 Cerf 2024. remains difficult for humans to interpret those models at the moment (Vafa and others 50 Acemoğlu and others 2023; Acemoğlu and 81 Ovadya 2023. 2024). others 2024; Benn and Lazar 2022; Lazar 82 Landemore 2022. 2024c; Sadowski, Viljoen and Whittaker 2021. 27 Nussberger and others 2022. There is also the case for economic inef- 83 Narayanan 2019. 28 Rueda and others 2024. Chen and Zheng ficiencies associated with sharing user data in 84 The Computational Democracy Project 2025. (2024) found that interpretability demand is online platforms (Acemoğlu and others 2022). higher in utilitarian domains of AI use than in 85 Tang 2024. 51 Catena, Tummolini and Santucci 2025; Lukoff hedonic ones, further adding to the evidence and others 2021. 86 Argyle and others 2023. that higher stakes relate to higher demand for AI interpretability. 52 Lazar 2025. 87 Tessler and others 2024. 29 Qi, Schölkopf and Jin 2024; Wachter, Mittel- 53 Fukuyama and others 2020. 88 Tessler and others 2024. stadt and Russell 2024. 54 Lazar 2025. 89 Costello, Pennycook and Rand 2024. 30 Winner 1980. 55 Siegel 2020. 90 Perspective 2025. 31 Even though we have to be careful in attrib- 56 Hogg and others 2024. 91 Jigsaw 2024. uting to machines human traits, a constant refrain in this Report. They have even been 57 Lazar 2024a. 92 Saltz, Jalan and Acosta 2024. characterized as seeking power, instrumen- 58 Lazar 2024c. 93 For a historical accounting, see Acemoğlu tally, in the pursuit of the objectives they were and Johnson (2023). programmed or trained to achieve (Carlsmith 59 Lazar 2024a. 2022). 94 Lazar 2025. 60 Lazar 2025. 32 UNDP 2024b. 95 Simon 1971. 61 For a review of some of the potential harms of 33 Carvalho (2025) develops a scenario of ex- AI in democratic deliberation, as well as some 96 Bhatia, Galesic and Mitchell 2024. treme concentration of power in a few people of the potential benefits, see Summerfield 97 Kurz 2023; Tirole 2023. enabled by the control of AI. and others (2024). 98 Gentzkow and others 2024; Prat and Valletti 34 Hogg and others 2024. 62 Hackenburg and Margetts 2024a; Simchon, 2022. Edwards and Lewandowsky 2024; Tappin 35 Lazar 2025. and others 2023. 99 Bradford, Waxman and Li 2024. The debate 36 Coeckelbergh 2024. on whether regulation hinders innovation 63 Bang and others 2024; Fulay and others could also be seen in this light. 37 Media, in general, always has the potential to 2024; Rozado 2024. influence political processes and the distribu- 100 Bradford 2024; Schaake 2024. 64 For example, the ways in which people come tion of power (Prat 2018). to hold beliefs is a result of complex individual 101 Stanger and others 2024. 38 Bak-Coleman and others 2021. and social processes, as examined in Levy 102 Stanger and others 2024. (2021). Moreover, the processes underpin- 39 Pan and others 2007. On the trust in genera- ning things such as motivated reasoning 103 Bradford 2020. tive AI search results, see Li and Aral (2025). (people forming beliefs biased by what they 104 Widder, Whittaker and West 2024. 40 Lazar 2025. want or value), while important, remain poorly NOTES 213 105 Phan and others 2025. 133 Rahman, Owen and You 2024. 7 Acemoğlu and Restrepo 2019. 106 Volenik 2024. 134 Statistica 2024. 8 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- neering and Medicine 2024. 107 Varoquaux, Luccioni and Whittaker 2024. 135 Fleck 2024. 9 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- 108 PIB Delhi 2025. 136 Tsado 2024. neering and Medicine 2024. 109 Open A.I. 2025. 137 Epoch AI 2024a, 2024b. 10 Touzet 2023. 110 European Commission 2025. 138 Oxford Insights 2023. The Data & Infrastruc- 11 Abbas Khan and others 2024. For example, ture pillar of the AI Readiness Index assesses 111 Ho and others 2024. one way science progresses is through the a country’s ability to support AI development combination of insights from distant scientific 112 Narayanan and Kapoor 2024. through open data policies, governance, fields (Shi and Evans 2023), recombination digital connectivity, statistical capacity and 113 Epoch AI 2024c. of novel ideas (Ham, Quistorff and Weinberg data representativeness. Strong open data 2025) or unusual combinations of data (Yu 114 Hampstead 2024. policies and governance ensure accessible, and Romero 2024), which AI can leverage (Gu reliable data for AI training. Digital connectiv- 115 Westberg 2024. and Krenn 2024). ity, measured by internet access and mobile 116 Vipra and West 2023. subscriptions, influences data generation. 12 Coyle and Selvi (2024) argue that the concept Statistical capacity reflects a country’s ability of inclusive innovation remains ambiguous. 117 So far, the efficiency gains demonstrated by to collect accurate data, while data represen- However, they suggest addressing this am- new open source models have not deterred tativeness—impacted by factors such as the biguity by ensuring that innovations actively some Big Tech companies from their plans gender gap in internet access—helps reduce benefit marginalized groups, particularly by to spend hundreds of billions on compute bias in AI systems. emphasizing affordability, social inclusion and resources (Weise 2025). capability building. 139 Macro Polo 2024. 118 Korinek and Vipra 2024a. 13 On the use of AI to fill knowledge shortfalls 140 Macro Polo 2024. 119 Bashir and others 2024; Galaz 2025. in biodiversity knowledge, see Pollock and 141 OECD 2025b. others (2025). 120 Browne 2024; Green 2024. 142 Bernstein 2024; Editorial Board 2025. 14 To achieve this, AI research and development 121 Parli 2025. could incorporate more flexible frameworks, 143 Schmid and others 2025. 122 McKinsey Analytics 2021. such as human-in-the-loop, human-on-the- 144 Schmid and others 2025. loop and human-in-command, ensuring that 123 Woolston 2022. technology remains an enabler rather than 145 Han and others 2020. 124 Stobierski 2020. an inexorable decisionmaker. Human-in- 146 Savage 2020. the-loop, human-on-the-loop and human-in- 125 Gambacorta and Shreeti 2025; Korinek and command represent different levels of human Vipra 2024b. 147 Schmid and others 2025. oversight in AI systems, each with unique 126 Villalobos and others 2024b. 148 Veale, Matus and Gorwa 2023. characteristics (HLEG 2019). For example, hu- man-in-the-loop requires continuous human 127 Saura García 2024; Zuboff 2019. 149 Voigt and Von dem Bussche 2017. participation and collaboration in decision- 128 Gans 2024b. 150 Bradford 2020. making, ensuring high control and nuanced outcomes, at the expense of efficiency due to 129 Chun, Hur and Hwang 2024. 151 Veale, Matus and Gorwa 2023. constant input. Human-on-the-loop involves a 130 Chun, Hur and Hwang (2024) measure a 152 Dennis 2024. supervisory role in which humans intervene country’s pre-existing technological capabili- only when necessary, striking a balance be- 153 Lancieri, Edelson and Bechtold 2024. ties using patent data from the United States tween control and efficiency, making it ideal Patent and Trademark Office, employing the 154 Dennis 2024. for routine tasks. Human-in-command places Revealed Comparative Advantage index, ultimate decisionmaking authority with hu- 155 Ho and others 2023. technology relatedness density and tech- mans, ensuring maximum control and safety. nology complexity. They assess a country’s 156 Kerry and others 2025. While AI systems can operate autonomously scientific knowledge base through journal under human-in-command, they will not make 157 Kerry and others 2025. articles from the Web of Science Core Collec- autonomous decisions, prioritizing human au- tion, using keyword searches, co-occurrence 158 Kerry and others 2025. thority without entirely dismissing operational networks and science–technology cross- efficiency (Crootof, Kaminski and Price 2023). proximity density to determine alignment be- These frameworks reflect varying levels of tween scientific and technological activities. CHAPTER 6 involvement, autonomy and tradeoffs in the 131 Chun, Hur and Hwang 2024. 1 Consider the seminal works in economics by, interaction between humans and AI systems. for example, Romer (1990, 1994) and Solow 15 For example, addressing AI biases in health 132 Oxford Insights 2023. It measures the matu- (1956), who show that productivity growth applications requires better algorithms and rity of the technology market, considering the hinges on knowledge and technological data, but coding alone will not redress biases number of AI and non-AI unicorns, trade in change. (Marwala 2024). This is in part because biases information and communication technology services and goods, and software spending. 2 Acemoğlu and Johnson 2023. require constant attention and monitoring, given that fairness considerations are context The innovation capacity of the sector is also 3 For example, Dor and Coglianese (2021), Rob- specific and dynamic (Mienye, Swart and assessed, looking at factors such as govern- bins and Brodwin (2020) and Scharre (2016) Obaido 2024). ment regulations, venture capital availability, describe AI integration in fields ranging from research and development spending and the procurement to health and military. 16 Esmaeilzadeh (2024) reports an ongoing adoption of AI for innovation. Finally, this pillar cultural shift in healthcare, with AI increasingly considers a country’s human capital, evaluat- 4 Distributing laptops hoping to address under- viewed as a delivery enhancer and job cre- ing the skills in the population needed to sup- lying education challenges was one such ator rather than as a threat. port the technology sector, including science, misguided approach (Pritchett 2024). 17 Perhaps analogously to the way that phar- technology, engineering and mathematics 5 Buera, Kaboski and Townsend 2023. maceuticals are deployed and monitored, as graduates and the quality of engineering and technology education. 6 Blaurock, Büttgen and Schepers 2024. suggested in Belenguer (2022). 214 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 18 In 2023 services accounted for half of global and Gmyrek 2024), as well as across high- to complete coding tasks faster (Peng and employment (World Bank 2025), while manu- and low-income economies, as the skill and others 2023), increased both the quality and facturing is becoming increasingly skill and task composition of the same occupation may speed of professional writing tasks among knowledge intensive (Cornelli, Frost and differ in different types of economies (Benítez- college-educated professionals (Noy and Mishra 2023), and geopolitical tensions and Rueda and Parrado 2024). Cazzaniga and Zhang 2023) and improved customer service supply chain concerns are altering trade others (2024) show that about 26 percent assistance (Brynjolfsson, Li and Raymond patterns (Qiu, Xia and Yetman 2025), even of the workforce in low-income economies 2025). as economies remain highly interdependent is exposed to AI, compared with about 60 41 Doshi and Hauser 2024. (UNDP 2024b). Furthermore, previous waves percent in higher-income economies. But of technological innovation have accelerated using a task-based approach rather than 42 Brynjolfsson, Li and Raymond 2025; Noy and automation and have been accompanied by estimating exposure to whole occupations, Zhang 2023. deroutinization of work in many countries Berg and Gmyrek (2024) and Gmyrek, Berg 43 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- (Bhorat and others 2023), polarization of job and Bescond (2023) find that only 43 percent neering and Medicine 2024. The many use opportunities in many countries (Autor 2022; of the workforce in high-income economies cases show that AI-driven advancements can Autor and Salomons 2018) and a reduction in is exposed to AI and that 5.1 percent risk create new business opportunities, not only labour’s share of income, even as new jobs automation of their jobs, 13.4 percent could by improving existing processes but also by are generated (Autor and Salomons 2018). benefit from augmentation and 24.2 percent enabling product and services innovation. is a “big unknown.” Furthermore, in countries 19 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- Furthermore, AI features such as adaptability with large informal labour markets, jobs are neering and Medicine 2024. and ability to learn and process vast amounts naturally less exposed to AI but are also left of data can reduce the costs of research 20 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- out of reaping potential productivity gains and development and accelerate innovation neering and Medicine 2024. from it (Benítez-Rueda and Parrado 2024). (Agrawal, McHale and Oettl 2024; Filippucci 21 Autor, Salomons and Seegmiller 2021. 32 Coyle 2025. and others 2024). In this sense some have argued that AI may be thought of as the in- 22 Crafts 2021. shows that the time it takes for a 33 On the pathways between AI and the vention of a method of invention (Crafts 2021), technological innovation to have marked pro- economy, see US National Academies of reshaping research processes (Duede and ductivity impacts has been greatly reduced. Sciences, Engineering and Medicine (2024), others 2024; Pyzer-Knapp and others 2022) For example, while the steam engine took which considers eight factors for determining and potentially accelerating the scientific about 61 years to generate substantial pro- the impact of AI on economies: the share of method itself (Pyzer-Knapp and others 2022). ductivity growth, electricity did it in 32 years the economy where the technology can be For example, DeepMind’s AlphaFold has and the internet and personal computers in 15 applied, the size of productivity effects in already revolutionized biology by accurately years. Seydl and Linden (2024) estimate that said applications, complementary technolo- predicting protein structures, a task that has AI will take 7–20 years. gies and bottlenecks in the economies, time historically required years of experimental lags from innovation to productivity effects, 23 Brynjolfsson 2022. research (Callaway 2022). To date, it has spillovers from AI-enabled sectors to other predicted and enabled open access to more 24 Touzet 2023. sectors and rent-seeking behaviours, hetero- than 200 million protein structures, consider- geneity within and across sectors and firms, 25 Autor, Salomons and Seegmiller 2021; Autor ably advancing research, drug discovery and measurement effects and dynamic effects. and others 2024; Crafts 2021; Ernst, Merola disease detection (AlphaFold n.d.). and Samaan 2019. 34 Crafts 2021. Historical introductions of general 44 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- purpose technologies, such as electricity, laid 26 Gmyrek, Berg and Bescond 2023. See also neering and Medicine 2024. the foundation for entirely new industries and Cazzaniga and others (2024). products—for modern manufacturing, tele- 45 Akcigit, Baslandze and Lotti 2023. 27 AI job exposure metrics, while giving an in- communications and even home appliances, 46 Acemoğlu and Restrepo 2019. dication of the potential for AI augmentation while expanding demand for electricians and or automation of jobs, tend not to consider engineers. Information and communication 47 See, for example, Acemoğlu and Johnson the economic rationales for augmentation or technology enabled new digital market- (2023). automation or the technical feasibility of AI in- places, changed how people collaborate and 48 Spence 2024. For example, studies show that tegration in work (Svanberg and others 2024). communicate in the workplace and gave rise a combination of human expertise and AI ca- to entirely new types of occupations. Some 28 Cazzaniga and others 2024. pabilities can outperform strategies that rely 60 percent of jobs in the United States in exclusively on human efforts or AI alone (Cao 29 Cazzaniga and others 2024. Conservative 2018 did not exist in 1940 (Autor, Salomons and others 2024), if each’s relative strength estimates place potential AI-induced growth and Seegmiller 2021; Autor and others 2024). is effectively leveraged (Eastwood 2025). in gross domestic product (GDP) by 2034 at Similarly, rather than automating wholesale And firms that adopt frontier technologies 1.25 percent, while the most optimistic ones occupations, AI seems to reshape the types for product innovation rather than process project growth of approximately 20 percent of tasks that humans carry out (Zarifhonarvar automation see higher sales (Babina and oth- (Seydl and Linden 2024). Using a micro- 2024), and new types of tasks, such as prompt ers 2024), revenue and employment (Babina macro framework, Filippucci, Gal and Schief engineering and evaluating and refining AI- and others 2024; Hirvonen, Stenhammar and (2024) estimate that AI-induced aggregate generated code, have quickly become part of Tuhkuri 2022), as well as substntial growth in productivity growth in the next 10 years will everyday work for many people. For example, nonroutine jobs (Arntz and others 2024). range from 0.25 to 0.60 percentage point. Google chief executive officer Sundar Pichai Another way of estimating the impact of AI is (2024) noted that, by the end of 2024, more 49 Spence 2024; Manyika and Spence 2023. to look at market size (revenue from sales of than a quarter of all code at Google was writ- 50 Cazzaniga and others 2024, p. 9. products and services) UNCTAD (2025) esti- ten by AI and reviewed by human workers. mates that the AI market will grow from $189 51 Diouf and others 2024. 35 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- billion in 2023 to $4.8 trillion in 2033. neering and Medicine 2024. 52 WTO 2025. 30 Robert Solow (1987, p. 2) famously said “You 36 Korinek 2023. 53 See, for example, Mejia 2025. can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity statistics” about the lack 37 Rajpurkar and others 2018. 54 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- of observable productivity impacts from in- neering and Medicine 2024. 38 Brynjolfsson, Li and Raymond 2025. vestment in information and communication 55 For example, Cazzaniga and others 2024. technology. 39 Doshi and Hauser 2024. find that higher-educated workers in high- 31 Estimates of exposure vary depending on 40 For example, having access to AI assistants income economies are better positioned to methodologies and definitions used (Berg enabled software developers and engineers harness generative AI for work augmentation NOTES 215 and have more access to and an easier time 89 In many cases companies developing AI- five largest US technology companies— transitioning to roles where generative AI is powered applications—particularly in safety Apple, Amazon, Alphabet (Google), Meta likely to enhance their work and surveillance, such as facial recognition, and Microsoft—when measured by business closed circuit television and autonomous ve- enterprise research and development. 56 Gmyrek, Winkler and Garganta 2024. hicles—actively obscure the extensive human 102 Cited in Haase and Pokutta (2024), p. 2. 57 ILO 2024; Krämer and Cazes 2022. labour involved, prioritizing the perception of cutting-edge technology or being at the fore- 103 While hallucinations in large language models 58 Bastani and Waldenström 2024. front of technological development (Tubaro are problematic and undesirable if the user is 59 Bastani and others 2024. 2021). This practice, often referred to as “faux- interested in factually accurate outputs, they tomation” (coined by Taylor 2018), pseudo-AI, may also be seen as a resource to inspire 60 Kovacev 2020; Merola 2022. forged labour or AI impersonation “involves a creativity (Sui and others 2024), though they 61 Bastani and Waldenström 2020; Bastani and process of ontological obfuscation whereby remain deeply problematic if they misrepre- others 2024; Brollo and others 2024. technological deficiencies are bootstrapped sent scientific knowledge (Sinha and others through the use of human workers” (Newlands 2025). 62 Bajpai 2024. 2021, p. 6). In other words, in these cases AI is 104 Ashkinaze and others 2024; Bilalić, Graf and 63 Gaspar 2016. less about replacing humans and more about Vaci 2025; Boussioux and others 2024; Fu relying on workers with work deficits, such 64 In Finland subsidies for frontier technology and others 2024; Girotra and others 2023; as low earnings, a lack of social protection adoption led to higher firm-level innovation Glickman and Sharot 2024a. There is also the and poor occupational safety and health to and increases in both revenue and employ- potential to use AI to enhance public under- sustain the AI system. Beyond standard data ment (Hirvonen, Stenhammar and Tuhkuri standing of science (Markowitz 2024). labelling or training, these workers manually 2022). perform tasks marketed as AI technologies. 105 Glickman and Sharot 2024b; Peng, Garg and 65 Wizeline 2023. Even sophisticated large language models Kleinberg 2024; Vaccaro, Almaatouq and with impressive capabilities rely heavily on Malone 2024. 66 Filippucci, Gal and Schief 2024; Spence human trainers to fine-tune their responses 2024. 106 The award of the 2024 Nobel Prizes in both and mitigate biases, toxicity and disturbing physics and chemistry to AI-related break- 67 Arntz and others 2024. Having access to content. We are grateful to Uma Rani at the throughs triggered some soul searching high-speed internet increased both firm ex- International Labour Organization for valuable about an epistemic barrier having potentially ports and the number of jobs per firm, with input on this matter. been breaching: pattern seeking without rea- associated reductions in poverty (World Bank 90 UN and ILO 2024. soning or explanation was deemed worthy of 2024c). scientific respect (Meng 2024). 91 Jindal 2023. 68 Filippucci and others 2024. 107 Melumad and Yun 2025. 92 Aloisi and De Stefano 2022. We thank Uma 69 J-PAL 2023; Lipowski, Salomons and Zierahn- Rani at the International Labour Organization 108 Kapoor and others 2024. Weilage 2024. for key contributions on the workers in the AI 109 For evidence on complementarity, see Agar- 70 UN and ILO 2024. supply chain. wal and others (2023), Agarwal and others 71 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- 93 Acemoğlu 2024. For instance, AI is trans- (2024) and Ludwig, Mullainathan and Ram- neering and Medicine 2024. forming scientific discovery by expediting bachan (2024). the entire research process, from extracting 72 See OECD n.d. 110 A more rigorous way of stating AI’s unique ca- knowledge and generating hypotheses to pabilities in comparison with those of humans 73 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- accelerating experimentation and verification, is that it has the ability to impose mathemati- neering and Medicine 2024. all at an unprecedented pace (AAAI 2025). cal structure onto unstructured data (Hofman 74 Humeau and Deshpande 2024. 94 Classical programming has supported many and others 2021). new discoveries. One example is the use of 75 OECD 2024c. 111 Abolghasemi, Ganbold and Rotaru 2025; Luo, computers to prove the four-color theorem Rechardt and others 2024; Karger and oth- 76 UN and ILO 2024; Brollo and others 2024. in 1976 (Robertson and others 1997). But, ers 2024; Schoenegger and others 2024a; as argued here, the potential of AI goes 77 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- Schoenegger and others 2024b. Expert beyond what was possible with classical neering and Medicine 2024. predictions are often very fraught (Grossmann programming. and others 2024). 78 Korinek and Stiglitz 2018. 95 Goldin and others 2024. 112 Lenton and others 2024. 79 Pagliari, Chambon and Berberian 2022. 96 Bloom and others 2020. 113 Pyzer-Knapp and others 2022. 80 Crootof and others 2023. 97 Crafts 2021. 114 Pyzer-Knapp and others 2022. 81 Fügener and others 2021; Zanatto, Chatting- 98 Ferrario and Loi 2022. Ferrario and Loi 2022. ton and Noyes 2021. 115 Merchant and others 2023. 99 Multistakeholder partnerships are useful 82 Singh and Johnston 2019. 116 Toner-Rodgers 2024. because choices are shaped not only by 83 Marsh, Vallejos and Spence 2022. governments and technology companies but 117 Agrawal, McHale and Oettl 2024; Ludwig and also by academic institutions, civil society or- Mullainathan 2024; Tranchero and others 84 Giacosa and others 2023. ganizations, multilateral agencies and worker 2024. 85 US National Academies of Sciences, Engi- associations (spotlight 6.3). Each brings dis- 118 Data are based on the use of AI in published neering and Medicine 2022. AI and digi- tinct perspectives and capabilities to shape scholarly papers in agriculture and food tally enabled innovations such as gamified choices so that AI is developed and deployed sciences, art, biology, business, chemistry, elements or task rotations can also make in ways that advance human development. computer science, economics, education, workflows more engaging, sustaining focus 100 Al-Kharusi and others 2024. engineering, environmental sciences, geol- and improving oversight in repetitive tasks ogy, history, linguistics, materials science, (Landers and Marin 2021). 101 The European Commission’s Joint Research mathematics, medicine, philosophy, physics, Centre (Rikap 2024) highlights the immense 86 Ball 2021. political science and psychology (Duede and influence of private investment in AI and others 2024; Xie and others 2024). 87 Martin, Wellen and Grimmer 2016. technology, noting that only the United States and China allocate more public funding to 119 Koch, Stojkoski and Hidalgo 2024. More 88 Ball 2021. research and development than any of the speculatively, some have argued for the 216 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 potential to use texts from the past to train games is helping scientists gain new insights with people, triggering creativity by making large language models to enrich historical into the brain. mistakes, having perceptual capabilities, be- analysis (Varnum and others 2024). ing contextual and cultural aware and being 131 He 2024. unpredictable (Heim and others 2023). 120 Sakai and others 2024. For other applica- 132 Abdurahman and others 2024; Feuerriegel tions in archaeology, see Cardarelli 2024. But 147 One innovation trap is the illusion of consen- and others 2025; Ke and others 2024; Peters applications of AI in archaeology have also sus that occurs when shared terminology cre- and Matz 2024; Rathje and others 2024. triggered heated debates, see Huggett (2021, ates a false impression of agreement on AI 2022), Cobb (2023), Gustafson (2024), Mag- 133 Y. Zhang and others 2025. goals, even when those goals remain highly nani and Clindaniel (2023) and Sobotkova contested. This misleading consensus can 134 Price and others 2024; Kochkov and oth- and others (2024). divert attention from more pressing and tan- ers 2024. For other applications, see, for gible challenges in AI development. Another 121 In December 2023 a leading journal pub- instance, Bran and others (2024), Kutz and trap is “supercharging bad science,” which lished a review of AI applications in economics others (2024) and Ma and others (2025). A refers to the way poorly defined concepts (Korinek 2023). This review has had two up- new algorithmic architecture has also shown and experimental methods, often justified by dates, one in June 2024 (Korinek 2024b) and promise for physics-informed AI models, the pursuit of artificial general intelligence, another in December 2024 (Korinek 2024a). opening the possibility of AI that combines worsen existing problems in AI research. See also Ash and Hansen (2023), Y. Chen and the best of both worlds: the ability to discern The lack of clear scientific rigour in these others (2023), Dell (2024) and Manning, Zhu patterns in data while producing outputs areas leads to unreliable findings and hinders and Horton (2024) and, in finance, Du and constrained by the laws of physics (Liu and meaningful progress (Blili-Hamelin and others others (2025), Eisfeldt and Schubert (2024) others 2024c; Rigas and others 2024; Urbán, 2025). and Kim, Muhn and Nikolaev (2024). Many Stefanou and Pons 2025). recent studies use large language models to 148 Blili-Hamelin and others (2025) pose critical 135 Enhancing what has been described as col- simulate responses by humans in surveys and questions about the direction of AI research, lective intelligence (Burton and others 2024; behavioural science experiments using homo asking how we can ensure that its goals Cui and Yasseri 2024; Gupta and others silicus instead of humans in economics (Filip- align with scientific, engineering and societal 2023; Leonard and Levin 2022; Peeters and pas, Horton and Manning 2024; Manning, Zhu needs, what constitutes rigorous scien- others 2021; Riedl and others 2021; Woolley and Horton 2024), finance (Yang and others tific inquiry in AI and who has the authority to and Gupta 2024), building on insights about 2025) and political science (Argyle and oth- shape these objectives. They argue that the broader interactions between humans and ers 2023; Piao and others 2025). One recent research community should move away from machines (Brinkmann and others 2023; Pe- study used a collection of 1 billion synthetic treating artificial general intelligence as the dreschi and others 2025; Rahwan and others personas to generate synthetic data (Ge and ultimate goal of AI development. 2019; Tsvetkova and others 2024). others 2024). Still, it is important to look at 149 AAAI 2025. these applications with care. In psychology 136 Yan and others 2024. studies, using large language models instead 150 Wang, Hertzmann and Russakovsky 2024. 137 Collins and others 2024. of people produces falsely significant findings 151 AAAI 2025; Sharma 2024. (Cui, Li and Zhou 2024), and Boelaert and oth- 138 Bail 2024; Binz and others 2025; Eger and ers (2025) show that large language models others 2025; He and others 2023; Hullman, 152 ETO 2024. respond to survey questions differently than Holtzman and Gelman 2023; Si, Yang and 153 The number of scientific AI peer-reviewed humans. Thus, using generative AI in this way Hashimoto 2024. The risk of misuse, com- articles has increased, with about 1.2 million should be carefully considered and justified, mon to AI more broadly, is a particularly seri- articles released between 2017 and 2022, yet not driven by the superficial anthropomor- ous concern, particularly in biology and drug this key field is underrepresented (ETO 2024). phizing perspective that large language discovery (Urbina and others 2022). One risk models are like humans. It is also important is related to the use of AI to write scholarly 154 Computer vision enables machines to inter- to be mindful of the potential cultural biases papers (Haider and others 2024; Novy-Marx pret visual data through techniques such as (Atari and others 2025) or diversity of politi- and Velikov 2025). image recognition, object detection, facial cal preferences (Rozado 2024) embedded in recognition, video analysis, medical imaging 139 Doshi and Hauser 2024; Wenger and Kenett large language models. and scene understanding. Closely linked to 2025. real-world applications, robotics extends AI’s 122 Osnabrügge, Ash and Morelli 2023; Licht 140 For example, 82 percent of the scientists reach into physical systems, incorporating 2023. who registered the dramatic improvement autonomous navigation, reinforcement learn- 123 Nguyen and others 2024. in materials discovery mentioned above also ing for robotic control, humanoid robotics, reported feeling less fulfilled in their work swarm robotics and human–robot interaction. 124 Piaggi and others 2022. (Toner-Rodgers 2024; see also Ghosh and Natural language processing allows AI to 125 Reynolds and others 2025. Sadeghian 2024 and Salah and others 2024). understand and generate human language, encompassing machine translation, sentiment 126 Chakraborty and others 2024; Eggertsen and 141 Resnik and others 2025. analysis, speech recognition, conversational others 2025; Gao and others 2024; Mehan- 142 Blau and others 2024. AI, information retrieval and text summariza- dru and others 2025; Singh, Kaur and Gehlot tion. Underpinning all these advancements is 2024; Y. Zhang and others 2024. 143 On liability challenges, see Volokh (2023). For AI safety, which focuses on keeping systems recent journalistic accounts on debates over 127 Jiang and others 2024. robust, interpretable and aligned with hu- intellectual property, see Olson and Prince man values, addressing key challenges such 128 Antunes, Butler and Grau-Crespo 2024; Mor- (2025) and Thornhill (2025). as adversarial resilience, fairness and bias tazavi 2025; Park, Li and Walsh 2024; Zeni 144 Kapoor and Narayanan 2023; McGreivy and mitigation and ensuring ethical deployment and others 2025. The importance of human Hakim 2024; Rosenblatt and others 2024. to prevent unintended harm. See Bengio and evaluation of AI outputs in materials science others (2024); Gyevnar and Kasirzadeh 2025. was put in sharp relief by the work of Li and 145 Messeri and Crockett 2024. others (2025), who show that training data 155 ETO 2024. 146 Ugander and Epstein (2024) emphasize the limitations constrain the generalizability and importance of randomness in creative pro- 156 Zhong and others 2024. interpretation of AI outputs in exploring new cesses. In 2023 the journal Science invited materials. 157 See Tonja and others (2024) and Zhong and young scientists to imagine a call from an others (2024). 129 Romera-Paredes and others 2024. AI sentient researcher for human help: what would AI need that only humans can provide? 158 UN and ILO 2024. 130 Luo, Rechardt and others 2024. Purves (2019) The contributions illuminated the unique explores how AI’s success in playing board 159 Barzelay, Ng and Romanoff 2024. role of humans in establishing connections NOTES 217 160 AI is increasingly enabling cross-border col- 177 Normile 2025. 203 Atkinson and others 2019. laboration in research and innovation, foster- 178 OECD 2024b. 204 OECD 2023b. ing new networks of knowledge production across regions. One notable example is the 179 Gould, Jimenez Naranjo and Balvanera 2025. 205 Ishida, Ihsan and Rudawan 2024. deepening AI research collaboration be- 180 Molenaar 2022; Tuomi 2019. 206 Farahani and Ghasemi 2024. tween China and Singapore. Between 2016 and 2021 their joint AI publications more 181 Faber, Luyten and Visscher 2017. 207 OECD 2024a. than doubled. Singapore has become a key 182 Angrist and Meager 2023. A study analys- 208 Khajeh Naeeni and Nouhi 2024. hub for Chinese technology firms seeking to ing more than 200 education policies and expand their research, investment and talent 209 Mollick and Mollick 2023. interventions across 52 countries reveals that pipelines. Major players such as Alibaba, targeting instruction to students’ learning lev- 210 Ijaz, Bogdanovych and Trescak 2017. Huawei and Yitu established research out- els, rather than to their grade level, alongside posts in the city-state during the late 2010s, 211 C. Gu and others 2024; X. Gu and others structured pedagogy, significantly improves often partnering with local universities or 2024. education outcomes (Angrist and others startups. This surge in colocated research 2024). 212 Beg and others 2022. For example, two and development has translated into mean- randomized controlled trials in Pakistan found ingful academic collaboration: since 2010 183 Jordan and others 2024. that combining teacher engagement with China has been Singapore’s top collabora- 184 Angrist, Bergman and Matsheng 2022. curriculum-based videos improved students’ tor in AI research, with more than 10,000 test scores more than using videos alone coauthored AI publications—nearly double 185 Angrist and others 2023. Students who re- (Beg and others 2022). the number involving the United States. Con- ceived personalized tutoring through phone versely, Singapore ranks among China’s top calls showed significant academic gains, 213 Ertmer and Ottenbreit-Leftwich 2010. five international research partners in AI. See highlighting the effectiveness of tailored 214 Angrist and Dercon 2024; Moundridou, Mat- ETO (2023). interventions alongside technology adoption zakos and Doukakis 2024. See also Bewers- and increased education spending 161 Barzelay, Ng and Romanoff 2024. dorff and others (2025). 186 Seldon, Abidoye and Metcalf 2020. 162 Human Development Report Office 215 Tan and others 2024. calculations using data retrieved in No- 187 Labadze, Grigolia and Machaidze 2023. 216 Kirkpatrick, Rivera and Akers 2022. vember 2024 from the Emerging Technol- 188 Rudolph and others 2024. ogy Observatory. The HDI classification is 217 Sedek 2021. indicated in https://hdr.undp.org/data-center/ 189 Björkegren and others 2025. 218 Bastani and others 2024. human-development-index#/indicies/HDI. 190 Henkel and others 2024. 219 Loeckx 2016. 163 Lehdonvirta, Wú and Hawkins 2024. The 191 De Simone 2025. authors discuss the geopolitics of AI chip pro- 220 Koedinger, Corbett and Perfetti 2012. duction (graphics processing units). They de- 192 Alan and Mumcu 2024. 221 Koedinger, Corbett and Perfetti 2012. scribe a division between the Compute North 193 Smith and Livingstone 2017. and Compute South, as well as Compute Des- 222 Mollick and others 2024. erts—distinctions based on countries’ access 194 Ahuja and others 2025. 223 Sperling and others 2022. to investment and semiconductor manufac- 195 Nweje, Amaka and Makai 2025. turing. This perspective highlights the emerg- 224 Mayer and DaPra 2012. ing global disparities in compute power and 196 Du Boulay 2016. 225 Lacity and Willcocks 2017. its implications for technological sovereignty 197 Aldridge and others 2024. and AI research and development. 226 Selwyn 2019. 198 Hassan and others 2024. 164 Atari and others 2025. 227 Fan and others 2025. 199 Theopilus and others 2024. A public health 165 Narayanan and Kapoor 2024. 228 Topol 2024a. approach is required to allow children to 166 UNESCO 2024d. enjoy the benefits of the digital world while 229 Liu and others 2025; K. Zhang and others safeguarding their mental health (Holly, De- 2024. 167 Global life expectancy at birth is projected to maio and Kickbusch 2024). Although digital reach 73.5 years in 2025, up from 64 years in 230 Topol 2023. technologies offer benefits in multiple areas, 1990 (UNDESA 2024b). their overuse poses psychological, social and 231 Bekbolatova and others 2024; Wachter and 168 Lutz and others 2021. ethical challenges. To mitigate these chal- Brynjolfsson 2024. lenges, schools and parents can implement 169 This estimate is based on math and science 232 Wang and Preininger 2019. digital wellbeing practices (George and Shaji and corrects for the percentage of children 2024). 233 For example, AI is used in obstetric diagnos- outside the school system (see Gust, Hanush- tics, such as foetal cardiotocography and ek and Woessmann 2024b). A different global 200 Beuermann and others 2015; Meza-Cordero ultrasonography (Kim, Cho and Kwon 2022). estimate indicates that 58 percent of students 2017. Learning-based inference of longitudinal im- achieved minimum proficiency in reading by 201 A randomized controlled trial in Kenya found age changes, a machine learning method, 2019 (see UNDESA 2024a). no meaningful medium-run impacts on chil- could accurately quantify relevant individual- 170 Gust, Hanushek and Woessmann 2024a. dren’s education or household wellbeing level changes in longitudinal imaging data, of- (consumption and expenditure, income and fering valuable insights for studying temporal 171 See table 1 in Statistical annex. earnings, asset ownership and wealth ac- mechanisms or guiding clinical decisions (Kim 172 WHO 2021. cumulation, employment and labour force and others 2025). AI has also been deployed participation) from expanding electric grid to identify neurocognitive changes in hard- 173 UNDP 2019. infrastructure in rural Kenya, and it could be to-access regions of the brain to diagnose 174 Pritchett 2024. because of credit constraints, bureaucratic neurodegenerative diseases (Yin and others red tape, low reliability and leakage, which, 2025). Along with sensors, AI has been de- 175 Muthukrishna 2025. as noted in chapter 1, could be related to ployed in applications ranging from monitor- 176 These three categories fall in the space of the lack of complementary assets that could ing dietary intake (Park and others 2024to higher-order thinking, which encompasses make good use of electricity (Lee, Miguel and sleep patterns (Tang and others 2025). More critical thinking, creative thinking and rela- Wolfram 2020b). recent applications leverage generative AI tional thinking (Miri, David and Uri 2007) to enhance disease diagnosis and treatment 202 Muralidharan, Singh and Ganimian 2019. 218 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 (Pierson and others 2025; Takita and others in AI more generally, see Afroogh and others 280 R. Chen and others 2023. 2025). For example, a recent study found (2024) and von Eschenbach (2021). 281 Sandoval-Almazan, Millan-Vargas and Garcia- GPT-4 diagnosed illnesses with 90 percent 247 Dychiao and others 2024. Contreras 2024. accuracy, surpassing physicians at 74 percent without AI and 76 percent with chatbot assis- 248 Saliba and others 2012; Scott Kruse and oth- 282 Moura and others 2024. tance, showcasing AI’s potential to improve ers 2018. 283 Rosenbacke and others 2024. diagnostics (Kolata 2024). 249 Celi and others 2022. 284 Platt and others 2024. 234 Ferdousi, Hossain and El Saddik 2021. AI- 250 Sarkar and others 2024. assisted healthcare systems strengthen 285 Shevtsova and others 2024. delivery by enabling collaboration, informa- 251 UN and ILO 2024. 286 Gille, Jobin and Ienca 2020. tion sharing and the use of electronic health 252 Parsa and others 2023. records (Palmer and others 2018). For ex- 287 Singh 2024. Singh 2024. ample, AI tools such as CC-Cruiser for child- 253 d’Elia and others 2022. 288 Singh 2024. Singh 2024. hood cataract diagnosis and Endoangel for 254 WHO 2022b. colonoscopy monitoring show how machine 289 Lara-Cinisomo and others 2021. Lara-Ciniso- learning can improve workflows and diagnos- 255 Moyer and others 2018. mo and others 2021. tics (Lin and others 2019). AI can also improve 256 Roopaei and others 2021. 290 Soto and others 2018. Soto and others 2018. the detection of small bowel bleeding lesions, offering faster and more accurate results than 257 Singh 2024. 291 Frank and others 2021. Frank and others traditional methods (Spada and others 2024). 2021. 258 Zhu and others 2024. 235 WHO 2024. For example, AI has improved 292 For example, using data from European 259 Shandhi and others 2024. prediction of ischemic heart disease risk by subnational regions and districts, Antonietti, integrating clinical records, biomarkers and 260 For example, see Han and others’ (2024) Burlina and Rodriguez-Pose (2025) found that imaging. Advanced diagnostic tools such as recent scoping review of randomized con- strong formal institutions (effective gover- four-dimensional flow magnetic resonance trolled trials of AI in clinical practice. nance) and informal institutions (bridging imaging and hybrid systems (including posi- social capital, trust) were key determinants 261 Obi and others 2024. tron emission tomography/magnetic reso- of whether digital technologies exacerbated nance imaging) provide a comprehensive 262 OECD 2023a. economic divides or brought more equitable understanding of cardiac health. AI’s ability economic outcomes. 263 Liu and others 2021. to analyse electrocardiograms, echocardiog- 293 Imbs and Wacziarg 2003. raphy and coronary angiography shows 264 Hosny and Sollaci 2022. promise in enhancing healthcare, especially 294 Oxford Insights 2024. 265 Denniston and Liu 2024. in low-income countries with limited access 295 As indicated by the economic complexity as- to specialized expertise (Uzokov and others 266 Goh and others 2024. sessment (Harvard Growth Lab 2025). 2024). 267 Rotenstein and Wachter 2024. Furthermore, 296 See, for example, the latest United Nations 236 Bailey and others 2024. A study of 1,600 emergency medical records Conference on Trade and Development State found large language model–generated 237 Chaix and others 2019. of Commodity Dependence report (UNCTAD handoff notes superior in automated evalua- 2023). 238 A review of 26 randomized controlled trials tions but slightly inferior in safety, emphasiz- across multiple countries found that mobile ing the need for a physician-in-loop design 297 Mishra and others 2023. interventions significantly reduced hospi- (Hartman and others 2024) 298 Diouf and others 2024. talization rates in heart failure patients and 268 Liu and others 2024a. lowered systolic blood pressure in hyperten- 299 Rodrik 2016; Rodrik and Sandhu 2024. For sion patients (Indraratna and others 2020) 269 Capraro and others 2024. low and medium HDI countries traditional Furthermore, AI-powered platforms, includ- development pathways—adopting exist- 270 Lenharo 2024. ing facial recognition and computer vision, ing technologies and leveraging relatively can also monitor medication adherence for 271 Phillips and others 2019. “cheap” labour to compete in international schizophrenia (Bain and others 2017). markets—have been framed by the expec- 272 Seyyed-Kalantari and others 2021. For ex- tation of convergence with higher-income 239 Uzokov and others 2024. ample, systems such as Michigan Medicine’s countries. But actual outcomes have been AI for sepsis diagnosis have faced issues 240 Adapa and others 2025. far more complex: while some countries have due to poor calibration across different set- seized these opportunities, convergence with 241 Alcazer and others 2024. See also Esteva tings (Gichoya and others 2023), highlight- very high HDI countries through traditional and others (2017), Gulshan and others (2016), ing the need for better transparency and manufacturing- and export-led strategies has Hannun and others (2019) and Rajpurkar and accountability. not materialized for a considerable number others (2018). 273 Rajpurkar and others 2022. of countries. Indeed, many countries are now 242 Turki, Engelke and Sobas 2024. experiencing shifts to predominantly service- 274 Sjoding and others 2020. based economies at lower incomes (Rodrik 243 Khan and others 2022b. 275 Slawomirski and others 2023. 2016). 244 Puja and others 2024. 276 Norori and others 2021. 300 Empowerment includes fostering digital 245 Towfek and Elkanzi 2024. See also Kraemer literacy and algorithmic awareness, enabling 277 Wilhelm, Steckelberg and Rebitschek 2025. and others (2025). individuals to understand and critically evalu- 278 Wei and others 2024. ate AI’s broader implications in their lives 246 For health specifically, see Sagona and others (Washington 2023). (2025) and Tejani and others (2024). For trust 279 Ueda and others 2024. NOTES 219 References AAAI (Association for the Advancement of Artificial for Growth, Factor Shares, and Employment.” American Adams, J. 2025. “How Stripe ‘Teaches’ Tech to Beat Intelligence). 2025. AAAI 2025 Presidential Panel on Economic Review 108(6): 1488–1542. the Payments Fraud Exam.” American Banker. the Future of AI Research. https://aaai.org/about-aaai /presidential-panel-on-the-future-of-ai-research/. Ac- Acemoğlu, D., and Restrepo, P. 2019a. “Artificial Intel- Adams, J., Dedehayir, O., and O’Connor, P. 2022. “A cessed 28 April 2025. ligence, Automation, and Work.” In Agrawal, A., Gans, J. Theoretical Model of Technology, Agency, and Well- S., and Goldfarb, A., (eds.), The Economics of Artificial being.” ISPIM Conference Proceedings. The Interna- Abbas Khan, M., Khan, H., Omer, M. F., Ullah, I., and Intelligence: An Agenda. Chicago, IL: University of Chi- tional Society for Professional Innovation Manage- Yasir, M. 2024. “Impact of Artificial Intelligence on the cago Press. ment (ISPIM). https://www.proquest.com/openview/7d Global Economy and Technology Advancements.” Ar- ef1e82da6c4bc1d91fd957a9c604f6/1?cbl=1796422&pq tificial General Intelligence (AGI) Security: Smart Appli- Acemoğlu, D., and Restrepo, P. 2019b. “Automation and -origsite=gscholar. Accessed 4 February 2025. cations and Sustainable Technologies. Springer. New Tasks: How Technology Displaces and Reinstates Labor.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 33(2): 3–30. Adapa, K., Gupta, A., Singh, S., Kaur, H., Trikha, A., Abduljabbar, R., Dia, H., Liyanage, S., and Bagloee, Sharma, A., and Rahul, K. 2025. “A Real World Evalu- S. A. 2019. “Applications of Artificial Intelligence in Acemoğlu, D., and Restrepo, P. 2020. “The Wrong ation of an Innovative Artificial Intelligence Tool for Transport: An Overview.” Sustainability 11(1): 189. Kind of AI? Artificial Intelligence and the Future of Population-Level Breast Cancer Screening.” NPJ Digital Labour Demand.” Cambridge Journal of Regions, Medicine 8(1): 2. Abdurahman, S., Atari, M., Karimi-Malekabadi, F., Economy and Society 13(1): 25–35. Xue, M. J., Trager, J., Park, P. S., Golazizian, P., Omra- Addati, L., Cattaneo, U., Esquivel, V., and Valarino, I. ni, A., and Dehghani, M. 2024. “Perils and Opportuni- Acemoğlu, D., and Restrepo, P. 2024. “A Task-Based 2018. Care Work and Care Jobs for the Future of De- ties in Using Large Language Models in Psychological Approach to Inequality.” Oxford Open Economics cent Work. Geneva: International Labour Organization. Research.” PNAS Nexus 3(7). 3(Supplement 1): i906–i929. Adnin, R., and Das, M. 2024. “‘I Look at It as the King Abid, A., Farooqi, M., and Zou, J. 2021. “Persistent Acemoğlu, D., Anderson, G. W., Beede, D. N., Buff- of Knowledge:’ How Blind People Use and Understand Anti-Muslim Bias in Large Language Models.” Proceed- ington, C., Childress, E. E., Dinlersoz, E., Foster, L. Generative AI Tools.” Proceedings of the 26th Inter- ings of the 2021 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, S., and others. 2022. “Automation and the Workforce: national ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers and Society, 298–306. A Firm-Level View from the 2019 Annual Business Sur- and Accessibility, 1–14. vey.” Working Paper 30659, National Bureau of Eco- Abolghasemi, M., Ganbold, O., and Rotaru, K. 2025. nomic Research, Cambridge, MA. Aelst, P. 2017. “Political Communication in a High- “Humans Vs. Large Language Models: Judgmental Choice Media Environment: A Challenge for Democ- Forecasting in an Era of Advanced AI.” International Acemoğlu, D., Autor, D., and Johnson, S. 2024. “Pol- racy?” Annals of the International Communication As- Journal of Forecasting forthcoming. icy Insight 123: Can We Have Pro-Worker AI?” Policy sociation 41(1): 3–27. Insight 123, Centre for Economic and Policy Research, Abrahams, S., and Levy, F. S. 2024. “Could Savan- Paris and London. Aeschlimann, S., Bleiker, M., Wechner, M., and nah Be the Next San Jose? The Downstream Effects Gampe, A. 2020. “Communicative and Social Conse- of Large Language Models.” 23 June. https://ssrn.com Acemoğlu, D., Fallah, A., Makhdoumi, A., Malekian, quences of Interactions with Voice Assistants.” Com- /abstract=4874104. A., and Ozdaglar, A. 2023. “How Good Are Privacy puters in Human Behavior 112: 106466. Guarantees? Platform Architecture and Violation of Abramson, J., Adler, J., Dunger, J., Evans, R., Green, User Privacy.” Working Paper 31413, National Bureau of Afroogh, S., Akbari, A., Malone, E., Kargar, M., and T., Pritzel, A., Ronneberger, O., and others. 2024. Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Alambeigi, H. 2024. “Trust in AI: Progress, Challenges, “Accurate Structure Prediction of Biomolecular Interac- and Future Directions.” Humanities and Social Scienc- tions with Alphafold 3.” Nature 630(8016): 493–500. Acemoğlu, D., Makhdoumi, A., Malekian, A., and es Communications 11(1): 1568. Ozdaglar, A. 2022. “Too Much Data: Prices and Ineffi- Acemoğlu, D. 2024. “Harms of AI.” In Bullock, J. B., ciencies in Data Markets.” American Economic Journal: Agan, A. Y., Davenport, D., Ludwig, J., and Mullaina- Chen, Y.-C., Himmelreich, J., Hudson, V. M., Korinek, A., Microeconomics 14(4): 218–56. than, S. 2023. “Automating Automaticity: How the Con- Young, M. M., and Zhang, B., (eds.), The Oxford Hand- text of Human Choice Affects the Extent of Algorithmic book of AI Governance. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Acemoğlu, D., Makhdoumi, A., Malekian, A., and Oz- Bias.” Working Paper 30981, National Bureau of Eco- Press. daglar, A. 2025. “When Big Data Enables Behavioral nomic Research, Cambridge, MA. Manipulation.” American Economic Review: Insights Acemoğlu, D. 2025. “Institutions, Technology and 7(1): 19–38. Agarwal, A., Usunier, N., Lazaric, A., and Nickel, M. Prosperity.” Working Paper 33442, National Bureau of 2024. “System-2 Recommenders: Disentangling Util- Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Achiam, J., Adler, S., Agarwal, S., Ahmad, L., Akkaya, ity and Engagement in Recommendation Systems Via I., Aleman, F. L., Almeida, D., and others. 2023. “GPT- Temporal Point-Processes.” Proceedings of the 2024 Acemoğlu, D., and Johnson, S. 2023. Power and 4 Technical Report.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774. ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Progress: Our Thousand-Year Struggle over Technol- Transparency, 1763–1773. ogy and Prosperity. New York: Hachette. Ada Lovelace Institute and The Alan Turing Institute. 2023. “How Do People Feel About AI? A Nationally Agarwal, N., Huang, R., Moehring, A., Rajpurkar, P., Acemoğlu, D., and Johnson, S. 2024. “Learning from Representative Survey of Public Attitudes to Artificial Salz, T., and Yu, F. 2024. “Comparative Advantage of Ricardo and Thompson: Machinery and Labor in the Intelligence in Britain (2023).” Humans Versus AI in the Long Tail.” AEA Papers and Early Industrial Revolution and in the Age of Artificial In- Proceedings 114: 618–22. telligence.” Annual Review of Economics 16(1): 597–621. Adam, D. 2023. “The Muse in the Machine.” Proceed- ings of the National Academy of Sciences 120(19): Agarwal, N., Moehring, A., Rajpurkar, P., and Salz, Acemoğlu, D., and Restrepo, P. 2018. “The Race be- e2306000120. T. 2023. “Combining Human Expertise with Artificial tween Man and Machine: Implications of Technology Intelligence: Experimental Evidence from Radiology.” 220 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Working Paper 31422, National Bureau of Economic Akcigit, U., Baslandze, S., and Lotti, F. 2023. “Con- Ali, S., DiPaola, D., Lee, I., Sindato, V., Kim, G., Blu- Research, Cambridge, MA. necting to Power: Political Connections, Innovation, mofe, R., and Breazeal, C. 2021. “Children as Cre- and Firm Dynamics.” Econometrica 91(2): 529–564. ators, Thinkers and Citizens in an AI-Driven Future.” Agrawal, A., Gans, J. S., and Goldfarb, A. 2019. “Arti- Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 2: ficial Intelligence: The Ambiguous Labor Market Impact Akerlof, G. A., and Shiller, R. J. 2010. Animal Spirits: 100040. of Automating Prediction.” Journal of Economic Per- How Human Psychology Drives the Economy, and Why It spectives 33(2): 31–50. Matters for Global Capitalism. Princeton University Press. Al-kfairy, M. 2025. “Strategic Integration of Generative AI in Organizational Settings: Applications, Challenges Agrawal, A., Gans, J. S., and Goldfarb, A. 2023. Akerlof, G. A., and Snower, D. J. 2016. “Bread and and Adoption Requirements.” IEEE Engineering Man- “Do We Want Less Automation?” Science 381(6654): Bullets.” Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization agement Review: 1–14. 155–158. 126: 58–71. Al-Kharusi, Y., Khan, A., Rizwan, M., and Bait-Su- Agrawal, A., Gans, J. S., and Goldfarb, A. 2024a. “Pre- Aktan, M. E., Turhan, Z., and Dolu, İ. 2022. “Attitudes wailam, M. M. 2024. “Open-Source Artificial Intel- diction Machines, Insurance, and Protection: An Alterna- and Perspectives Towards the Preferences for Artificial ligence Privacy and Security: A Review.” Computers tive Perspective on AI’s Role in Production.” Journal of Intelligence in Psychotherapy.” Computers in Human 13(12): 311. the Japanese and International Economies 72: 101307. Behavior 133: 107273. Allcott, H., Braghieri, L., Eichmeyer, S., and Gentz- Agrawal, A., Gans, J. S., and Goldfarb, A. 2024b. Alammar, Z., Alzubaidi, L., Zhang, J., Li, Y., Gupta, kow, M. 2020. “The Welfare Effects of Social Media.” “The Turing Transformation: Artificial Intelligence, Intel- A., and Gu, Y. 2024. “Generalisable Deep Learning American Economic Review 110(3): 629–676. ligence Augmentation, and Skill Premiums.” Harvard Framework to Overcome Catastrophic Forgetting.” In- Data Science Review Special Issue 5. telligent Systems with Applications 23: 200415. Allcott, H., Gentzkow, M., and Song, L. 2022. “Digi- tal Addiction.” American Economic Review 112(7): Agrawal, A., Gans, J., and Goldfarb, A. 2022a. Power Alan, S., and Mumcu, I. 2024. “Nurturing Childhood 2424–2463. and Prediction: The Disruptive Economics of Artificial Curiosity to Enhance Learning: Evidence from a Ran- Intelligence. Harvard Business Press. domized Pedagogical Intervention.” American Eco- Allcott, H., Gentzkow, M., Mason, W., Wilkins, A., nomic Review 114(4): 1173–1210. Barberá, P., Brown, T., Cisneros, J. C., and others. Agrawal, A., Gans, J., and Goldfarb, A. 2022b. Pre- 2024. “The Effects of Facebook and Instagram on the diction Machines, Updated and Expanded: The Simple Alber, D. A., Yang, Z., Alyakin, A., Yang, E., Rai, S., 2020 Election: A Deactivation Experiment.” Proceed- Economics of Artificial Intelligence. Harvard Business Valliani, A. A., Zhang, J., and others. 2025. “Medical ings of the National Academy of Sciences 121(21): Press. Large Language Models Are Vulnerable to Data-Poi- e2321584121. soning Attacks.” Nature Medicine 31(2): 618–626. Agrawal, A., McHale, J., and Oettl, A. 2024. “Artificial Allen, A., Markou, S., Tebbutt, W., Requeima, J., Bru- Intelligence and Scientific Discovery: A Model of Priori- Alcazer, V., Le Meur, G., Roccon, M., Barriere, S., insma, W. P., Andersson, T. R., Herzog, M., and oth- tized Search.” Research Policy 53(5): 104989. Le Calvez, B., Badaoui, B., Spaeth, A., and others. ers. 2025. “End-to-End Data-Driven Weather Predic- 2024. “Evaluation of a Machine-Learning Model Based tion.” Nature: 1–3. Aher, G. V., Arriaga, R. I., and Kalai, A. T. 2023. “Using on Laboratory Parameters for the Prediction of Acute Large Language Models to Simulate Multiple Humans Leukaemia Subtypes: A Multicentre Model Develop- Allen, B. P. 1994. “Case-Based Reasoning: Business and Replicate Human Subject Studies.” International ment and Validation Study in France.” The Lancet Digi- Applications.” Communications of the ACM 37(3): Conference on Machine Learning, 23–29 July, Hawaii, tal Health 6(5): e323–e333. 40–43. 337–371. Alcott, B. 2005. “Jevons’ Paradox.” Ecological Eco- Allen, E. 2011. “Facebook to Use Microsoft’s Photodna Ahn, J., Verma, R., Lou, R., Liu, D., Zhang, R., and Yin, nomics 54(1): 9–21. Technology to Combat Child Exploitation.” https://blogs W. 2024. “Large Language Models for Mathematical .microsoft.com/on-the-issues/2011/05/19/facebook-to Reasoning: Progresses and Challenges.” arXiv preprint Aldasoro, I., Armantier, O., Doerr, S., Gambacorta, L., -use-microsofts-photodna-technology-to-combat-child arXiv:2402.00157. and Oliviero, T. 2024. “The GenAI Gender Gap.” Eco- -exploitation/. Accessed 20 September 2024. nomics Letters: 241: 111814. Ahuja, J., and Fichadia, P. A. 2024. “Concerns Re- Allen, J., Watts, D. J., and Rand, D. G. 2024. “Quantify- garding the Glorification of Mental Illness on Social Aldasoro, I., Gambacorta, L., Korinek, A., Shreeti, V., ing the Impact of Misinformation and Vaccine-Skeptical Media.” Cureus 16(3). and Stein, M. 2024. Intelligent Financial System: How Content on Facebook.” Science 384(6699): eadk3451. AI Is Transforming Finance. Bank for International Set- Ahuja, N. J., Dutt, S., Choudhary, S. L., and Kumar, tlements, Monetary and Economic Department. Allen, M., Babiker, M., Chen, Y., de Coninck, H. C., M. 2025. “Intelligent Tutoring System in Education for and de Kleijne, K. 2018. “IPCC SR15: Summary for Disabled Learners Using Human–Computer Interaction Aldridge, G., Tomaselli, A., Nowell, C., Reupert, A., Policymakers.” IPCC Special Report Global Warming and Augmented Reality.” International Journal of Hu- Jorm, A., and Yap, M. B. H. 2024. “Engaging Parents of 1.5 ºC. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. man–Computer Interaction 41(3): 1804–1816. in Technology-Assisted Interventions for Childhood Ad- versity: Systematic Review.” Journal of Medical Internet ALNAP (Active Learning Network for Accountability AI Sweden. n.d. “Om AI Sweden.” https://www.ai.se Research 26: e43994. and Performance). 2022. “The State of the Humanitar- /sv/om-ai-sweden. Accessed 1 April 2025. ian System (SOHS) – Summary.” ALNAP, London. Ales, L., Combemale, C., and Ramayya, K. 2024. Aiken, E., Bellue, S., Karlan, D., Udry, C., and Blumen- “Generative AI, Adoption and the Structure of Tasks.” Aloisi, A., and De Stefano, V. 2022. “Your Boss Is stock, J. E. 2022. “Machine Learning and Phone Data Available at SSRN 4786671. an Algorithm: Artificial Intelligence, Platform Work and Can Improve Targeting of Humanitarian Aid.” Nature Labour.” Bloomsbury Publishing. 603(7903): 864–870. Ales, L., Combemale, C., Fuchs, E. R., and Whitefoot, K. 2023. “How It’s Made: A General Theory of the La- AlphaFold. n.d. “Alphafold Protein Structure Data- AIPI (AI Preparedness Index). 2025. AI Preparedness bor Implications of Technology Change.” Available at base.” https://www.alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/. Accessed 20 Index. International Monetary Fund. SSRN 4615324. January 2025. Aitken, J. M., Veres, S. M., Shaukat, A., Gao, Y., Alhosani, K., and Alhashmi, S. M. 2024. “Opportunities, Altay, S., and Gilardi, F. 2024. “People Are Skeptical Cucco, E., Dennis, L. A., Fisher, M., and others. 2018. Challenges, and Benefits of AI Innovation in Government of Headlines Labeled as AI-Generated, Even If True or “Autonomous Nuclear Waste Management.” IEEE Intel- Services: A Review.” Discover Artificial Intelligence 4(1): 18. Human-Made, Because They Assume Full AI Automa- ligent Systems 33(6): 47–55. tion.” PNAS Nexus 3(10). Ali, S. S., and Choi, B. J. 2020. “State-of-the-Art Artifi- Ajunwa, I. 2023. The Quantified Worker: Law and cial Intelligence Techniques for Distributed Smart Grids: Altchek, A. 2024. “Replika Lets You Buy an AI Girlfriend Technology in the Modern Workplace. Cambridge Uni- A Review.” Electronics 9(6): 1030. or Boyfriend—and Its Average User Age Is Surpris- versity Press. ing.” Business Insider. https://www.businessinsider.com REFERENCES 221 /replika-ai-girlfriend-boyfriend-online-dating-companion Andre, P., Haaland, I., Roth, C., Wiederholt, M., Anwar, M. A. 2022. “Platforms of Inequality: Gender -age-2024-8. Accessed 12 February 2025. and Wohlfart, J. 2024. “Narratives About the Macro- Dynamics of Digital Labour in Africa.” Gender & Devel- economy.” CEBI Working Paper 18/21, Department of opment 30(3): 747–764. Altman, S. 2024. “The Intelligence Age.” https://ia Economics, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen. .samaltman.com/. Accessed 28 April 2025. Aprin, F., Malzahn, N., Lomonaco, F., Donabauer, Andreas, J., Beguš, G., Bronstein, M. M., Diamant, G., Ognibene, D., Kruschwitz, U., Hernández-Leo, Alvarez, A., Caliskan, A., Crockett, M. J., Ho, S. S., R., Delaney, D., Gero, S., Goldwasser, S., and others. D., Fulantelli, G., and Hoppe, H. U. 2023. The “Cour- Messeri, L., and West, J. 2024. “Science Communica- 2022. “Toward Understanding the Communication in age Companion” – an AI-Supported Environment for tion with Generative AI.” Nature Human Behaviour 8(4): Sperm Whales.” iScience 25(6). Training Teenagers in Handling Social Media Critically 625–627. and Responsibly. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, Andreoni, M., Lunardi, W. T., Lawton, G., and Thak- 395–406. Alzate, D. 2023. “Addressing Inequalities in Educa- kar, S. 2024. “Enhancing Autonomous System Security tional Markets with the Power of Personalized Infor- and Resilience with Generative AI: A Comprehensive Ardila, D., Kiraly, A. P., Bharadwaj, S., Choi, B., Reich- mation.” https://jackson.yale.edu/news/addressing Survey.” IEEE Access 12: 109470–109493. er, J. J., Peng, L., Tse, D., and others. 2019. “End-to- -inequalities-in-educational-markets-with-the-power-of End Lung Cancer Screening with Three-Dimensional -personalized-information/. Angelidis, S., Amplayo, R. K., Suhara, Y., Wang, X., Deep Learning on Low-Dose Chest Computed Tomog- and Lapata, M. 2021. “Extractive Opinion Summariza- raphy.” Nature Medicine 25(6): 954–961. Alzubaidi, L., Al-Dulaimi, K., Salhi, A., Alammar, Z., tion in Quantized Transformer Spaces.” Transactions Fadhel, M. A., Albahri, A. S., Alamoodi, A. H., and of the Association for Computational Linguistics 9: Argyle, L. P., Bail, C. A., Busby, E. C., Gubler, J. R., others. 2024. “Comprehensive Review of Deep Learn- 277–293. Howe, T., Rytting, C., Sorensen, T., and Wingate, D. ing in Orthopaedics: Applications, Challenges, Trust- 2023. “Leveraging AI for Democratic Discourse: Chat worthiness, and Fusion.” Artificial Intelligence in Medi- Anglia Ruskin University. 2024. “Growing Demand Interventions Can Improve Online Political Conversa- cine 155: 102935. on Dark Web for AI Abuse Images.” https://www.aru tions at Scale.” Proceedings of the National Academy .ac.uk/news/growing%20demand%20on%20dark%20 of Sciences 120(41): e2311627120. Alzubaidi, L., Zhang, J., Humaidi, A. J., Al-Dujaili, A., web%20for%20ai%20abuse%20images. Accessed 17 Duan, Y., Al-Shamma, O., Santamaría, J., and oth- September 2024. Argyle, L. P., Busby, E. C., Fulda, N., Gubler, J. R., Ryt- ers. 2021. “Review of Deep Learning: Concepts, CNN ting, C., and Wingate, D. 2023. “Out of One, Many: Architectures, Challenges, Applications, Future Direc- Angrist, N., Ainomugisha, M., Bathena, S. P., Berg- Using Language Models to Simulate Human Samples.” tions.” Journal of Big Data 8(1): 53. man, P., Crossley, C., Cullen, C., Letsomo, T., and Political Analysis 31(3): 337–351. others. 2023. “Building Resilient Education Systems: Amadeus. 2017. “Voyage of Discovery: Working To- Evidence from Large-Scale Randomized Trials in Five Aridor, G., Jiménez-Durán, R., Levy, R. e., and Song, wards Inclusive and Accessible Travel for All.” https:// Countries.” Working Paper 31208, National Bureau of L. 2024. “The Economics of Social Media.” Journal of amadeus.com/documents/en/airlines/research-report Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Economic Literature 62(4): 1422–1474. /voyage-of-discovery.pdf. Accessed 27 December 2024. Angrist, N., and Dercon, S. 2024. “Mind the Gap be- Arifuzzaman, M., Aniq Gul, M., Khan, K., and Hossain, tween Education Policy and Practice.” Nature Human S. M. Z. 2021. “Application of Artificial Intelligence (AI) Ameh, B. 2024. “Digital Tools and AI: Using Technol- Behaviour 8(12): 2261–2263. for Sustainable Highway and Road System.” Symmetry ogy to Monitor Carbon Emissions and Waste at Each 13(1): 60. Stage of the Supply Chain, Enabling Real-Time Ad- Angrist, N., and Meager, R. 2023. Implementation justments for Sustainability Improvements.” Interna- Matters: Generalizing Treatment Effects in Education. Aristotle 1999. “Politics.” Kitchener, ON: Batoche tional Journal of Science and Research Archive 13(1): SSRN. https://ssrn.com/abstract=4487496. Books. 2741–2754. Angrist, N., Bergman, P., and Matsheng, M. 2022. Armantier, O., Doerr, S., Frost, J., Fuster, A., and Amlani, N. 2024. “AI Exploitation and Child Sexual “Experimental Evidence on Learning Using Low-Tech Shue, K. 2024. “Nothing to Hide? Gender and Age Abuse: The Need for Safety by Design.” https:// When School Is Out.” Nature Human Behaviour 6(7): Differences in Willingness to Share Data.” BIS Working www.justsecurity.org/97065/ai-anti-child-sexual 941–950. Paper 1187, Bank for International Settlements, Basel. -exploitation/. Angrist, N., Evans, D. K., Filmer, D., Glennerster, R., Armona, L. 2023. “Online Social Network Effects in Anderson, C. A., Allen, J. J., Plante, C., Quigley- Rogers, H., and Sabarwal, S. 2024. “How to Improve Labor Markets: Evidence from Facebook’s Entry to Col- McBride, A., Lovett, A., and Rokkum, J. N. 2019. Education Outcomes Most Efficiently? A Review of the lege Campuses.” Review of Economics and Statistics: “The MTurkification of Social and Personality Psychol- Evidence Using a Unified Metric.” Journal of Develop- 1–47. ogy.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 45(6): ment Economics: 103382. 842–850. Arntz, M., Genz, S., Gregory, T., Lehmer, F., and Angwin, J., Larson, J., Mattu, S., and Kirchner, L. Zierahn-Weilage, U. 2024. “De-Routinization in the Anderson, C. A., Shibuya, A., Ihori, N., Swing, E. L., 2022. “Machine Bias.” Ethics of Data and Analytics. Fourth Industrial Revolution–Firm-Level Evidence.” ZA Bushman, B. J., Sakamoto, A., Rothstein, H. R., and Auerbach Publications. Discussion Papers (No. 16740). Saleem, M. 2010. “Violent Video Game Effects on Ag- gression, Empathy, and Prosocial Behavior in Eastern Ansari, Y., Virwani, K., Yahyazadeh, S., Thompson, Arrow, K. J., Forsythe, R., Gorham, M., Hahn, R., and Western Countries: A Meta-Analytic Review.” Psy- L. E., Lofano, E., Fong, A., Miller, R. D., and La, Y.-H. Hanson, R., Ledyard, J. O., Levmore, S., and others. chological Bulletin 136(2): 151–173. 2018. “A Highly Stable Sodium–Oxygen Battery Using 2008. “The Promise of Prediction Markets.” Science a Mechanically Reinforced Membrane.” Advanced En- 320: 877–878. Anderson, D. R., and Subrahmanyam, K. 2017. “Digi- ergy Materials 8(36): 1802603. tal Screen Media and Cognitive Development.” Pediat- Artsi, Y., Sorin, V., Konen, E., Glicksberg, B. S., Nad- rics 140(Supplement 2): 57–61. Antonietti, R., Burlina, C., and Rodríguez-Pose, A. karni, G., and Klang, E. 2024. “Large Language Mod- 2025. “Digital Technology and Regional Income In- els for Generating Medical Examinations: Systematic Anderson, E. 2001. “Symposium on Amartya Sen’s Phi- equality: Are Better Institutions the Solution?” Papers in Review.” BMC Medical Education 24(1): 354. losophy: 2 Unstrapping the Straitjacket of ‘Preference’: Regional Science 104(2): 100079. A Comment on Amartya Sen’s Contributions to Philoso- Ash, E., and Hansen, S. 2023. “Text Algorithms in Eco- phy and Economics.” Economics and Philosophy 17(1): Antsaklis, P. 2020. “Autonomy and Metrics of Autono- nomics.” Annual Review of Economics 15(Volume 15, 21–38. my.” Annual Reviews in Control 49: 15–26. 2023): 659–688. Anderson, J. 2013. “Autonomy.” International Encyclo- Antunes, L. M., Butler, K. T., and Grau-Cres- Ashkinaze, J., Mendelsohn, J., Qiwei, L., Budak, C., pedia of Ethics. po, R. 2024. “Crystal Structure Generation with and Gilbert, E. 2024. “How AI Ideas Affect the Creativ- Autoregressive Large Language Modeling.” Nature ity, Diversity, and Evolution of Human Ideas: Evidence Communications 15(1): 10570. 222 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 from a Large, Dynamic Experiment.” arXiv preprint Autor, D. H. 2019. “Work of the Past, Work of the Fu- Disabilities in Ghana, West Africa.” Journal of Educa- arXiv:2401.13481. ture.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 109: 1–32. tional and Social Research 3(1): 187–198. Asia-Plus. 2024. “Tajikistan Sets Ambitious Goal That Autor, D. H., Levy, F., and Murnane, R. J. 2003. “The Bahnweg, E., and Omar, H. 2023. “Effects of Tiktok on 5% of Its GDP Will Come from AI-Related Economic Ac- Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Em- Adolescents Mental Health and Wellbeing.” Dynamics tivity by 2040.” https://asiaplustj.info/en/node/339221. pirical Exploration.” The Quarterly Journal of Econom- of Human Health 10(1). Accessed 13 December 2024. ics 118(4): 1279–1333. Bai, X., Wang, A., Sucholutsky, I., and Griffiths, T. L. Askari, H., Chhabra, A., von Hohenberg, B. C., He- Autor, D., and Salomons, A. 2018. “Is Automation 2024. “Measuring Implicit Bias in Explicitly Unbiased seltine, M., and Wojcieszak, M. 2024. “Incentivizing Labor-Displacing? Productivity Growth, Employment, Large Language Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402 News Consumption on Social Media Platforms Using and the Labor Share.” Working Paper 24871, National .04105. Large Language Models and Realistic Bot Accounts.” Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. PNAS Nexus 3(9). Bai, Y., Jones, A., Ndousse, K., Askell, A., Chen, A., Autor, D., Chin, C., Salomons, A., and Seegmiller, B. DasSarma, N., Drain, D., and others. 2022a. “Training Aslan, M., and Atesoglu, H. 2021. “The Effect of In- 2024. “New Frontiers: The Origins and Content of New a Helpful and Harmless Assistant with Reinforcement novation and Participation as Workplace Values on Job Work, 1940–2018.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics Learning from Human Feedback.” arXiv preprint arXiv: Satisfaction and the Mediating Effect of Psychological 139(3): 1399–1465. 2204.05862. Ownership.” Sage Open 11(4). Autor, D., Dorn, D., Katz, L. F., Patterson, C., and Van Bai, Y., Kadavath, S., Kundu, S., Askell, A., Kernion, Atari, M., Xue, M. J., Park, P. S., Blasi, D., and Hen- Reenen, J. 2020. “The Fall of the Labor Share and the J., Jones, A., Chen, A., and others. 2022b. “Constitu- rich, J. 2025. “Which Humans?” PsyArXiv Preprints. Rise of Superstar Firms.” The Quarterly Journal of Eco- tional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback.” arXiv pre- https://psyarxiv.com/5b26t. nomics 135(2): 645–709. print arXiv:2212.08073. Athey, S. C., Bryan, K. A., and Gans, J. S. 2020. “The Autor, D., Salomons, A., and Seegmiller, B. 2021. Bail, C. A. 2024. “Can Generative AI Improve Social Allocation of Decision Authority to Human and Artificial New Frontiers: The Origins and Content of New Work, Science?” Proceedings of the National Academy of Intelligence.” AEA Papers and Proceedings 110: 80–84. 1940–2018. MIT. Sciences 121(21): e2314021121. Athreya, B. 2021. “Bias in, Bias Out: Gender and Autor, D., Salomons, A., and Seegmiller, B. 2024. Bail, C. A., Argyle, L. P., Brown, T. W., Bumpus, J. Work in the Platform Economy.” https://idl-bnc-idrc “New Frontiers: The Origins and Content of New Work, P., Chen, H., Hunzaker, M. B. F., Lee, J., and others. .dspacedirect.org/items/7d8e2f97-b1dd-49ad-9843 1940–2018.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 139(3): 2018. “Exposure to Opposing Views on Social Media -a0480f5f80eb. Accessed 28 April 2025. 1399–1465. Can Increase Political Polarization.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115(37): 9216–9221. Atkin, D., and Donaldson, D. 2015. “Who’s Getting Awad, E., Dsouza, S., Kim, R., Schulz, J., Henrich, J., Globalized?: The Size and Implications of Intra-National Shariff, A., Bonnefon, J.-F., and Rahwan, I. 2018. “The Bailey, R. L., MacFarlane, A. J., Field, M. S., Tagko- Trade Costs.” Working Paper 21439, National Bureau of Moral Machine Experiment.” Nature 563(7729): 59–64. poulos, I., Baranzini, S. E., Edwards, K. M., Rose, C. Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. J., and others. 2024. “Artificial Intelligence in Food and Awuah, W. A., Ben-Jaafar, A., Roy, S., Nkrumah- Nutrition Evidence: The Challenges and Opportunities.” Atkinson, R. D., Brake, D., Castro, D., Cunliff, C., Ken- Boateng, P. A., Tan, J. K., Abdul-Rahman, T., and Atal- PNAS Nexus 3(12): pgae461. nedy, J., McLaughlin, M., McQuinn, A., and New, J. lah, O. 2025. “Predicting Survival in Malignant Glioma 2019. A Policymaker’s Guide to the “Techlash”—What Using Artificial Intelligence.” European Journal of Medi- Baillargeon, P., Yoon, J., and Zhang, A. 2024. “Who It Is and Why It’sa Threat to Growth and Progress. Infor- cal Research 30(1): 61. Puts the ‘Social’ in ‘Social Computing?’ Using a Neu- mation Technology and Innovation Foundation. rodiversity Framing to Review Social Computing Re- Ayoka, G., Barbareschi, G., Cave, R., and Holloway, search.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.15527. Atkinson, S., Lawson, V., and Wiles, J. 2011. “Care of C. 2024. “Enhancing Communication Equity: Evalua- the Body: Spaces of Practice.” Social & Cultural Geog- tion of an Automated Speech Recognition Application Baily, M., Brynjolfsson, E., and Korinek, A. 2023. “Ma- raphy 12(6): 563–572. in Ghana.” Proceedings of the CHI Conference on Hu- chines of Mind: The Case for an AI-Powered Productiv- man Factors in Computing Systems. ity Boom.” Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. Aubry, R., Quiamzade, A., and Meier, L. L. 2024. “De- pressive Symptoms and Upward Social Comparisons Azaria, A., Azoulay, R., and Reches, S. 2024. “Chat- Bain, E. E., Shafner, L., Walling, D. P., Othman, A. A., During Instagram Use: A Vicious Circle.” Personality GPT Is a Remarkable Tool—for Experts.” Data Intelli- Chuang-Stein, C., Hinkle, J., and Hanina, A. 2017. and Individual Differences 217: 112458. gence 6(1): 240–296. “Use of a Novel Artificial Intelligence Platform on Mo- bile Devices to Assess Dosing Compliance in a Phase Austin, V., and Holloway, C. 2022. “Assistive Technol- Azqueta-Gavaldón, A. 2020. “Causal Inference be- 2 Clinical Trial in Subjects with Schizophrenia.” JMIR ogy (AT), for What?” Societies 12(6): 169. tween Cryptocurrency Narratives and Prices: Evidence mHealth and uHealth 5(2): e7030. from a Complex Dynamic Ecosystem.” Physica A: Sta- Australian Red Cross. 2017. “Going Local Achiev- tistical Mechanics and its Applications 537: 122574. Bajpai, D. A. 2024. “Evaluating the Impact of Artificial ing a More Appropriate and Fit-for-Purpose Hu- Intelligence on Enhancing Tax Compliance and Finan- manitarian Ecosystem in the Pacific.” https:// Babina, T., Fedyk, A., He, A. X., and Hodson, J. 2023. cial Regulation.” Available at SSRN 4922459. humanitarianadvisorygroup.org/wp-content/uploads “Firm Investments in Artificial Intelligence Technolo- /2020/12/ARC-Localisation-report-Electronic-301017 gies and Changes in Workforce Composition.” Working Bak-Coleman, J. B., Alfano, M., Barfuss, W., Berg- .pdf. Paper 31325, National Bureau of Economic Research, strom, C. T., Centeno, M. A., Couzin, I. D., Donges, Cambridge, MA. J. F., and others. 2021. “Stewardship of Global Collec- Autor, D. 2014. “Polanyi’s Paradox and the Shape of tive Behavior.” Proceedings of the National Academy Employment Growth.” Working Paper 20485, National Babina, T., Fedyk, A., He, A., and Hodson, J. 2024. of Sciences 118(27): e2025764118. Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. “Artificial Intelligence, Firm Growth, and Product Innova- tion.” Journal of Financial Economics 151: 103745. Bak-Coleman, J. B., Tokita, C. K., Morris, D. H., Ru- Autor, D. 2022. “The Labor Market Impacts of Tech- benstein, D. I., and Couzin, I. D. 2022. “Collective nological Change: From Unbridled Enthusiasm to Baek, M., DiMaio, F., Anishchenko, I., Dauparas, J., Wisdom in Polarized Groups.” Collective Intelligence Qualified Optimism to Vast Uncertainty.” Working Paper Ovchinnikov, S., Lee, G. R., Wang, J., and others. 1(1): 263391372211047–263391372211047. 30074, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam- 2021. “Accurate Prediction of Protein Structures and bridge, MA. Interactions Using a Three-Track Neural Network.” Sci- Baldwin, R., and Okubo, T. 2024. “Are Software Au- ence 373(6557): 871–876. tomation and Teleworker Substitutes? Preliminary Autor, D. 2024. “AI Could Actually Help Rebuild the Evidence from Japan.” The World Economy 47(4): Middle Class.” Noema Magazine. Baffoe, M. 2013. “Stigma, Discrimination & Margin- 1531–1556. alization: Gateways to Oppression of Persons with REFERENCES 223 Ball, K. 2021. “Electronic Monitoring and Surveillance Bass, M., Dueholm, M., Kalyani, A., and Ozkan, S. Parrots: Can Language Models Be Too Big?” Proceed- in the Workplace.” European Commission Joint Re- 2024. “AI Optimism and Uncertainty: What Can Earn- ings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Account- search Centre. ings Calls Tell Us Post-ChatGPT?” Federal Reserve ability, and Transparency, 3–10 March, online, 610–623. Bank of St. Louis. Ballard, D. H., and Brown, C. M. 1982. Computer Vi- Bengio, Y., Daniel, P., Tamay, B., Rishi, B., Stephen, sion. Prentice Hall Professional Technical Reference. Bastani, H., Bastani, O., Sungu, A., Ge, H., Kabakcı, C., Yejin, C., Danielle, G., and others. 2025. Interna- O., and Mariman, R. 2024. “Generative AI Can Harm tional Scientific Report on the Safety of Advanced AI. Bandiera, O., Elsayed, A., Heil, A., and Smurra, A. Learning.” Available at SSRN 4895486. London: UK Department for Science, Innovation and 2022. “Presidential Address 2022: Economic Devel- Technology and AI Safety Institute, Government of the opment and the Organisation of Labour: Evidence from Bastani, S., and Waldenström, D. 2020. “How Should United Kingdom. the Jobs of the World Project.” Journal of the European Capital Be Taxed?” Journal of Economic Surveys 34(4): Economic Association 20(6): 2226–2270. 812–846. Bengio, Y., Hinton, G., Yao, A., Song, D., Abbeel, P., Darrell, T., Harari, Y. N., and others. 2024. “Manag- Bang, Y., Chen, D., Lee, N., and Fung, P. 2024. “Mea- Bastani, S., and Waldenström, D. 2024. “Future Tax ing Extreme AI Risks Amid Rapid Progress.” Science suring Political Bias in Large Language Models: What Challenges in an AI-Driven Economy.” https://cepr 384(6698): 842–845. Is Said and How It Is Said.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403 .org/voxeu/columns/future-tax-challenges-ai-driven .18932. -economy. Accessed 6 March 2025. Bengio, Y., Mindermann, S., Privitera, D., Besiroglu, T., Bommasani, R., Casper, S., Choi, Y., and others. Banh, L., and Strobel, G. 2023. “Generative Artificial Bastian, M. B., Fröhlich, L., Wessendorf, J., Sche- 2024. “International Scientific Report on the Safety of Intelligence.” Electronic Markets 33(1): 63. schenja, M., König, A. M., Jedelska, J., and Mahnken, Advanced AI (Interim Report).” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412 A. H. 2024. “Prevalence of Burnout among German .05282. Barassi, V. 2024. “Toward a Theory of AI Errors: Mak- Radiologists: A Call to Action.” European Radiology ing Sense of Hallucinations, Catastrophic Failures, and 34(9): 5588–5594. Ben-Ishai, G., Dean, J., Manyika, J., Porat, R., Varian, the Fallacy of Generative AI.” Harvard Data Science H., and Walker, K. 2024. “AI and the Opportunity for Review (Special Issue 5). Baumol, W. J. 2012. The Cost Disease: Why Comput- Shared Prosperity: Lessons from the History of Technol- ers Get Cheaper and Health Care Doesn’t. New Ha- ogy and the Economy.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401 .09718. Barbelet, V., Davies, G., Flint, J., and Davey, E. 2021. ven, CT: Yale University Press. Interrogating the Evidence Base on Humanitarian Lo- Benítez, T. M., Xu, Y., Boudreau, J. D., Kow, A. W. C., calisation. HPG Literature Review. London: ODI. https:// Bawden, D., and Robinson, L. 2020. “Information Bello, F., Van Phuoc, L., Wang, X., and others. 2024. odi.org/en/publications/interrogating-the-evidence Overload: An Introduction.” Oxford Research Encyclo- “Harnessing the Potential of Large Language Models -base-on-humanitarian-localisation-aliterature-study. pedia of Politics. in Medical Education: Promise and Pitfalls.” Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association 31(3): Barnes, A. J., Zhang, Y., and Valenzuela, A. 2024. Beane, M. 2024. The Skill Code: How to Save Human 776–783. “AI and Culture: Culturally Dependent Responses to AI Ability in an Age of Intelligent Machines. HarperCollins. Systems.” Current Opinion in Psychology: 101838. Benítez-Rueda, M., and Parrado, E. 2024. “Mirror, Mir- Becker, A. 2024. More Everythign Forever: AI Over- ror on the Wall: Which Jobs Will AI Replace after All? Barnett, M. 2018. Empire of Humanity: A History of lords, Space Empires, and Silicon Valley’s Crusade to A New Index of Occupational Exposure.” IDB Working Humanitarianism. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. Control the Fate of Humanity. New York: Basic Books. Paper Series. Barocas, S., Hardt, M., and Narayanan, A. 2023. Fair- Becker, J., Brackbill, D., and Centola, D. 2017. “Net- Benn, C., and Lazar, S. 2022. “What’s Wrong with Au- ness and Machine Learning: Limitations and Opportu- work Dynamics of Social Influence in the Wisdom tomated Influence.” Canadian Journal of Philosophy nities. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. of Crowds.” Proceedings of the National Academy 52(1): 125–148. of Sciences of the United States of America 114(26): Baron, N. S. 2023. “Even Kids Are Worried ChatGPT E5070–E5076. Bennett, C. L., and Keyes, O. 2020. “What Is the Point Will Make Them Lazy Plagiarists, Says a Linguist Who of Fairness? Disability, AI and the Complexity of Justice.” Studies Tech’s Effect on Reading, Writing and Think- Becker, J., Porter, E., and Centola, D. 2019. “The Wis- ACM SIGACCESS Accessibility and Computing (125): 1–1. ing.” https://fortune.com/2023/01/19/what-is-chatgpt dom of Partisan Crowds.” Proceedings of the National -ai-effect-cheating-plagiarism-laziness-education-kids Academy of Sciences 166(22): 201817195–201817195. Benselin, J. C., and Ragsdell, G. 2016. “Information -students/. Accessed 5 May 2024. Overload: The Differences That Age Makes.” Journal of Bedi, S., Liu, Y., Orr-Ewing, L., Dash, D., Koyejo, S., Librarianship and Information Science 48(3): 284–297. Baronchelli, A. 2024. “Shaping New Norms for AI.” Callahan, A., Fries, J. A., and others. 2025. “Testing Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Bio- and Evaluation of Health Care Applications of Large Berente, N., Kormylo, C., and Rosenkranz, C. 2024. logical Sciences 379(1897): 20230028. Language Models: A Systematic Review.” JAMA 333(4): “Test-Driven Ethics for Machine Learning.” Communica- 319–328. tions of the ACM 67(5): 45–47. Barrault, L., Chung, Y.-A., Meglioli, M. C., Dale, D., Dong, N., Duquenne, P.-A., Elsahar, H., and others. Beg, S., Halim, W., Lucas, A. M., and Saif, U. 2022. Berg, J., and Gmyrek, P. 2024. “Differences between 2025. “Joint Speech and Text Machine Translation for “Engaging Teachers with Technology Increased IMF (2024) and ILO (WP96, 2023) Estimates of AI Expo- up to 100 Languages.” Nature 637(8046): 587–593. Achievement, Bypassing Teachers Did Not.” American sure Technical Analysis of Detailed Scores and Estima- Economic Journal: Economic Policy 14(2): 61–90. tion Methods.” Internal ILO Note, forthcoming. Barro, R. J., and J.W. Lee. 2018. Dataset of Education- al Attainment, June 2018 Revision. http://www.barrolee Bekbolatova, M., Mayer, J., Ong, C. W., and Toma, M. Berger, V. 2024. “AI Is Changing the Future of Human .com. Accessed 4 October 2024. Transformative Potential of AI in Healthcare: Defini- Intimacy. Here’s What to Know.” Forbes, 22 October. tions, Applications, and Navigating the Ethical Land- https://www.forbes.com/sites/virginieberger/2024/10 Barzelay, A., Ng, J., and Romanoff, M. 2024. “Govern- scape and Public Perspectives. Healthcare, 2024. /22/ai-is-changing-the-future-of-human-intimacy-heres ing Artificial Intelligence Responsibility in Low to Middle MDPI, 125. -what-to-know/. Accessed 30 October 2024. Income Countries: Enabling Pathways to Sustainable Development.” California Western International Law Belenguer, L. 2022. “AI Bias: Exploring Discriminatory Bergerman, M., Maeta, S. M., Zhang, J., Freitas, G. Journal 54(2): 3. Algorithmic Decision-Making Models and the Applica- M., Hamner, B., Singh, S., and Kantor, G. 2015. “Ro- tion of Possible Machine-Centric Solutions Adapted bot Farmers: Autonomous Orchard Vehicles Help Tree Bashir, N., Donti, P., Cuff, J., Sroka, S., Ilic, M., Sze, from the Pharmaceutical Industry.” AI and Ethics 2(4): Fruit Production.” IEEE Robotics & Automation Maga- V., Delimitrou, C., and Olivetti, E. 2024. “The Climate 771–787. zine 22(1): 54–63. and Sustainability Implications of Generative AI.” An MIT Exploration of Generative AI. Bender, E. M., Gebru, T., McMillan-Major, A., and Berger-Tal, O., Wong, B. B., Adams, C. A., Blumstein, Shmitchell, S. 2021. “On the Dangers of Stochastic D. T., Candolin, U., Gibson, M. J., Greggor, A. L., 224 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 and others. 2024. “Leveraging AI to Improve Evi- Bhandari, A. 2024. “Revolutionizing Radiology with Birhane, A., Steed, R., Ojewale, V., Vecchione, B., dence Synthesis in Conservation.” Trends in Ecology Artificial Intelligence.” Cureus 16(10). and Raji, I. D. 2024. “AI Auditing: The Broken Bus on & Evolution. the Road to AI Accountability.” 2024 IEEE Conference Bharadwaj, S. 2024. “Google-Apollo Tie up for Early on Secure and Trustworthy Machine Learning (SaTML), Berglund, L., Tong, M., Kaufmann, M., Balesni, M., Detection of Cancer in India.” The Times of India. https:// 9–11 April, Copenhagen, 612–643. Stickland, A. C., Korbak, T., and Evans, O. 2024. “The timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/hyderabad/google Reversal Curse: LLMs Trained on ‘A Is B’ Fail to Learn ‘B -health-apollo-partner-for-early-detection-of-high Bittman, M., Rice, J. M., and Wajcman, J. 2004. “Ap- Is A.’” arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.12288. -mortality-diseases-in-india/articleshow/108629295 pliances and Their Impact: The Ownership of Domestic .cms. Accessed 18 October 2024. Technology and Time Spent on Household Work.” The Bernstein, D. 2024. Who Is Winning the AI Arms Race? British Journal of Sociology 55(3): 401–423. Bhat, S. A., and Huang, N.-F. 2021. “Big Data and AI Bernstein, M., Christin, A., Hancock, J., Hashimoto, Revolution in Precision Agriculture: Survey and Chal- Björkegren, D., Choi, J. H., Budihal, D., Sobhani, D., T., Jia, C., Lam, M., Meister, N., and others. 2023. lenges.” IEEE Access 9: 110209–110222. Garrod, O., and Atherton, P. 2025. “Could AI Leapfrog “Embedding Societal Values into Social Media Algo- the Web? Evidence from Teachers in Sierra Leone.” rithms.” Journal of Online Trust and Safety 2(1). Bhatia, S., Galesic, M., and Mitchell, M. 2024. “Edito- arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.12397. rial for the Special Issue on Algorithms in Our Lives.” Berreby, D. 2024. “As Use of AI Soars, So Does the Perspectives on Psychological Science 19(5): 707–710. Blanchflower, D. G. 2021. “Is Happiness U-Shaped Energy and Water It Requires.” Yale Environment 360. Everywhere? Age and Subjective Well-Being in 145 Bhattacharyya, R. 2024. “Digital India Sparks Rush for Countries.” Journal of Population Economics 34(2): Besbes, O., Kanoria, Y., and Kumar, A. 2024. “The New-Age Software Engineers.” The Economic Times, 575–624. Fault in Our Recommendations: On the Perils of Op- 15 May. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/jobs/hr timizing the Measurable.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405 -policies-trends/digital-india-sparks-rush-for-new-age Blanchflower, D. G. 2025a. “Declining Youth Well- .03948. -software-engineers/articleshow/110126612.cms. Being in 167 UN Countries. Does Survey Mode, or Question Matter? “ Working Paper 33415, National Bu- Besiroglu, T., Emery-Xu, N., and Thompson, N. 2024. Bhorat, H., Hill, R., Köhler, T., Monnakgotla, J., and reau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. https:// “Economic Impacts of AI-Augmented R&D.” Research Steenkamp, F. 2023. “Who Are the Robots Coming www.nber.org/papers/w33415. Accessed 17 February Policy 53(7): 105037. For? The Evolving Task Content of Employment in 2025. South Africa.” SARChI Industrial Development Working Bessen, J. 2015. Learning by Doing: The Real Con- Paper Series 2023-06. Blanchflower, D. G. 2025b. “The Global Decline in the nection between Innovation, Wages, and Wealth. Yale Mental Health of the Young.” NBER Reporter, National University Press. Bhorat, H., Lilenstein, K., Oosthuizen, M., and Thorn- Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. ton, A. 2020. Wage Polarization in a High-Inequality Bessen, J. 2016. “How Computer Automation Affects Emerging Economy. Helsinki: UNU-WIDER. Blanchflower, D. G., and Bryson, A. 2024a. “The Occupations: Technology, Jobs, and Skills.” Law and Consequences of Abuse, Neglect and Cyber-Bullying Economics Research Paper 15–49, Boston University Bhuller, M., Havnes, T., McCauley, J., and Mogstad, on the Wellbeing of the Young.” Working Paper 32119, School of Law. M. 2024. “How the Internet Changed the Market for National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Print Media.” American Economic Journal: Applied Eco- MA. https://www.nber.org/papers/w32119. Accessed 3 Bessen, J. 2018. “AI and Jobs: The Role of Demand.” nomics 16(2): 318–358. March 2025. Working Paper 24235, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Bi, K., Xie, L., Zhang, H., Chen, X., Gu, X., and Tian, Q. Blanchflower, D. G., and Bryson, A. 2024b. “The 2023. “Accurate Medium-Range Global Weather Fore- Mental Health of the Young in Africa.” Working Paper Bessen, J., and Frick, W. 2018. “How Software Is casting with 3D Neural Networks.” Nature 619(7970): 33280, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam- Helping Big Companies Dominate.” Harvard Business 533–538. bridge, MA. https://www.nber.org/papers/w33280. Ac- Review. cessed 18 February 2025. Bick, A., Blandin, A., and Deming, D. J. 2024. “The Bessen, J., Goos, M., Salomons, A., and van den Rapid Adoption of Generative AI.” Working Paper Blanchflower, D. G., and Bryson, A. 2024c. “The Berge, W. 2025. “What Happens to Workers at Firms 32966, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam- Mental Health of the Young in Latin America.” Working That Automate?” The Review of Economics and Statis- bridge, MA. Paper 33111, National Bureau of Economic Research, tics 107(1): 125–141. Cambridge, MA. https://www.nber.org/papers/w33111. Biecek, P., and Samek, W. 2024. “Position: Explain Accessed 17 February 2025. Bessen, J., Impink, S. M., Reichensperger, L., and to Question Not to Justify.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402 Seamans, R. 2023. “The Business of AI Startups.” Law .13914. Blanchflower, D. G., and Bryson, A. 2025. “The Men- and Economics Research Paper 18–28, Boston Univer- tal Health of the Young in Asia and the Middle East: sity School of Law. Bigoulaeva, I., Madabushi, H. T., and Gurevych, I. The Importance of Self-Reports.” Working Paper 33475, 2025. “The Inherent Limits of Pretrained LLMs: The National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Beuermann, D. W., Cristia, J., Cueto, S., Malamud, O., Unexpected Convergence of Instruction Tuning and MA. https://www.nber.org/papers/w33475. Accessed and Cruz-Aguayo, Y. 2015. “One Laptop Per Child at In-Context Learning Capabilities.” arXiv Preprint arXiv: 18 February 2025. Home: Short-Term Impacts from a Randomized Experi- 2501.08716. ment in Peru.” American Economic Journal: Applied Blanchflower, D. G., Bryson, A., and Bell, D. N. 2024. Economics 7(2): 53–80. Bilalić, M., Graf, M., and Vaci, N. 2025. “Computers “The Declining Mental Health of the Young in the Uk.” and Chess Masters: The Role of AI In transforming Elite Working Paper 32879, National Bureau of Economic Beurer-Kellner, L., Fischer, M., and Vechev, M. 2023. Human Performance.” British Journal of Psychology Research, Cambridge, MA. https://www.nber.org “Prompting Is Programming: A Query Language for Forthcoming. /papers/w32879. Accessed 18 February 2025. Large Language Models.” Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages 7: 1946–1969. Bilen, E., and Hervé, J. 2025. “When AI Gives Bad Blanchflower, D. G., Bryson, A., and Xu, X. 2024. Advice: Critical Thinking in Human-AI Collaborations.” “The Declining Mental Health of the Young and the Bewersdorff, A., Hartmann, C., Hornberger, M., SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=5040466. Global Disappearance of the Hump Shape in Age in Seßler, K., Bannert, M., Kasneci, E., Kasneci, G., Zhai, Unhappiness.” Working Paper 32337, National Bureau X., and Nerdel, C. 2025. “Taking the Next Step with Binz, M., Alaniz, S., Roskies, A., Aczel, B., Bergstrom, of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Generative Artificial Intelligence: The Transformative C. T., Allen, C., Schad, D., and others. 2025. “How Role of Multimodal Large Language Models in Science Should the Advancement of Large Language Models Blanchflower, D. G., Bryson, A., Lepinteur, A., and Education.” Learning and Individual Differences 118: Affect the Practice of Science?” Proceedings of the Na- Piper, A. 2024. “Further Evidence on the Global De- 102601. tional Academy of Sciences 122(5): e2401227121. cline in the Mental Health of the Young.” Working Pa- per 32500, National Bureau of Economic Research, REFERENCES 225 Cambridge, MA. https://www.nber.org/papers/w32500. Bommasani, R., Kapoor, S., Klyman, K., Longpre, S., of US Manufacturing.” Working Paper 30400, National Accessed 17 Feburary 2025. Ramaswami, A., Zhang, D., Schaake, M., and others. Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 2024. “Considerations for Governing Open Founda- Blau, W., Cerf, V. G., Enriquez, J., Francisco, J. S., tion Models.” Science 386(6718): 151–153. Bowen, T. R., Dmitriev, D., and Galperti, S. 2023. Gasser, U., Gray, M. L., Greaves, M., and others. “Learning from Shared News: When Abundant Informa- 2024. “Protecting Scientific Integrity in an Age of Gen- Bond, R. M., Fariss, C. J., Jones, J. J., Kramer, A. D. tion Leads to Belief Polarization.” The Quarterly Journal erative AI.” Proceedings of the National Academy of I., Marlow, C., Settle, J. E., and Fowler, J. H. 2012. of Economics 138(2): 955–1000. Sciences 121(22): e2407886121. “A 61-Million-Person Experiment in Social Influence and Political Mobilization.” Nature 2012 489:7415 489(7415): Boyd, R., and Richerson, P. J. 1985. Culture and the Blaurock, M., Büttgen, M., and Schepers, J. 2024. 295–298. Evolutionary Process. Chicago, IL: University of Chi- “Designing Collaborative Intelligence Systems for Em- cago Press. ployee-AI Service Co-Production.” Journal of Service Bondi, E., Fang, F., Hamilton, M., Kar, D., Dmello, Research: 10946705241238751. D., Choi, J., Hannaford, R., and others. 2018. “Spot Bozkurt, A., Xiao, F., Lambert, S., Pazurek, A., Poachers in Action: Augmenting Conservation Drones Crompton, H., Koseoglu, S., Farrow, R., and others. Blili-Hamelin, B., Graziul, C., Hancox-Li, L., Hazan, H., with Automatic Detection in near Real Time.” Proceed- 2023. “Speculative Futures on ChatGPT and Genera- El-Mhamdi, E.-M., Ghosh, A., Heller, K., and others. ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence tive Artificial Intelligence (AI): A Collective Reflection 2025. “Stop Treating AGI as the North-Star Goal of AI 32(1). from the Educational Landscape.” 18: 53–130. Research.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03689. Bone, J. K., Bu, F., Fluharty, M. E., Paul, E., Sonke, J. Bradford, A. 2020. The Brussels Effect: How the Euro- Blodgett, S. L., Barocas, S., Daumé III, H., and Wal- K., and Fancourt, D. 2022. “Arts and Cultural Engage- pean Union Rules the World. Oxford University Press. lach, H. 2020. “Language (Technology) Is Power: A Criti- ment, Reportedly Antisocial or Criminalized Behaviors, cal Survey of” Bias” in NLP.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005 and Potential Mediators in Two Longitudinal Cohorts of Bradford, A. 2023. Digital Empires: The Global Battle .14050. Adolescents.” Journal of Youth and Adolescence 51(8): to Regulate Technology. Oxford University Press. 1463–1482. Blodgett, S. L., Lopez, G., Olteanu, A., Sim, R., and Bradford, A. 2024. “The False Choice between Digital Wallach, H. 2021. “Stereotyping Norwegian Salmon: Bonnefon, J.-F., Rahwan, I., and Shariff, A. 2024. Regulation and Innovation.” Northwestern University An Inventory of Pitfalls in Fairness Benchmark Data- “The Moral Psychology of Artificial Intelligence.” Annual Law Review 119: 377. sets.” Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Review of Psychology 75: 653–675. Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th Bradford, A., Waxman, M. C., and Li, E. 2024. “How International Joint Conference on Natural Language Bonney, K., Breaux, C., Buffington, C., Dinlersoz, Domestic Institutions Shape the Global Tech War.” Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), 1004–1015. E., Foster, L., Goldschlag, N., Haltiwanger, J., Kroff, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id= Z., and Savage, K. 2024a. “The Impact of AI on the 4954744. Bloom, N., Jones, C. I., Van Reenen, J., and Webb, M. Workforce: Tasks Versus Jobs?” Economics Letters 2020. “Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?” American 244: 111971. Bradford, A., Waxman, M. C., and Li, E. Forthcom- Economic Review 110(4): 1104–1144. ing. “ How Domestic Institutions Shape the Global Tech Bonney, K., Breaux, C., Buffington, C., Dinlersoz, War.” Harvard National Security Journal. Blount, D., Gero, S., Van Oast, J., Parham, J., Kingen, E., Foster, L., Goldschlag, N., Haltiwanger, J., Kroff, C., Scheiner, B., Stere, T., and others. 2022. “Fluke- Z., and Savage, K. 2024b. Tracking Firm Use of AI in Brady, W. J., and Crockett, M. J. 2024. “Norm Psy- book: An Open-Source AI Platform for Cetacean Photo Real Time: A Snapshot from the Business Trends and chology in the Digital Age: How Social Media Shapes Identification.” Mammalian Biology 102(3): 1005–1023. Outlook Survey. Washington, DC: U.S. Census Bureau the Cultural Evolution of Normativity.” Perspectives on Center for Economic Studies. Psychological Science 19(1): 62–64. Blumenstock, J. 2020. “Machine Learning Can Help Get Covid-19 Aid to Those Who Need It Most.” Nature. Borges, B., Foroutan, N., Bayazit, D., Sotnikova, A., Brady, W. J., Jackson, J. C., Lindström, B., and Montariol, S., Nazaretzky, T., Banaei, M., and others. Crockett, M. 2023. “Algorithm-Mediated Social Learn- Boali, A., Asgari, H. R., Mohammadian Behbahani, 2024. “Could ChatGPT Get an Engineering Degree? ing in Online Social Networks.” Trends in Cognitive Sci- A., Salmanmahiny, A., and Naimi, B. 2024. “Remotely Evaluating Higher Education Vulnerability to AI Assis- ences 27(10): 947–960. Sensed Desertification Modeling Using Ensemble of tants.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- Machine Learning Algorithms.” Remote Sensing Appli- ences 121(49): e2414955121. Braghieri, L., Levy, R., and Makarin, A. 2022. “Social cations: Society and Environment 34: 101149. Media and Mental Health.” American Economic Review Born, G., Morris, J., Diaz, F., and Anderson, A. 2021. 112(11): 3660–3693. Boelaert, J., Coavoux, S., Ollion, E., Petev, I. D., “Artificial Intelligence, Music Recommendation, and the and Präg, P. 2025. “How Do Generative Lan- Curation of Culture.” White Paper, University of Toronto, Breda, T., Jouini, E., Napp, C., and Thebault, G. 2020. guage Models Answer Opinion Polls?” Sociologi- Schwartz Reisman Institute for Technology and Society, “Gender Stereotypes Can Explain the Gender-Equality cal Methods & Research 0(0). https://doi.org/10.1177 CIFAR. Paradox.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- /00491241251330582. ences 117(49): 31063–31069. Bostrom, N. 2014. Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Bogle, A. 2024. “‘Stop All Time Wasting:’ Woolworths Strategies. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Brennan, J. 2016. Against Democracy. Princeton Uni- Workers Tracked and Timed under New Efficiency versity Press. Crackdown.” The Guardian, 22 October. https://www Botes, M. 2023. “Autonomy and the Social Dilemma .theguardian.com/business/2024/oct/23/woolworths of Online Manipulative Behavior.” AI and Ethics 3(1): Bresnahan, T. 2021. “Artificial Intelligence Technolo- -staff-efficiency-productivity-crackdown-timed. Ac- 315–323. gies and Aggregate Growth Prospects.” In Diamond, J. cessed 28 February 2025. W., and Zodrow, G. R., (eds.), Prospects for Economic Boulus-Rødje, N., Cranefield, J., Doyle, C., and Growth in the United States. Cambridge, UK: Cam- Boine, C. 2023. “Emotional Attachment to AI Com- Fleron, B. 2024. “GenAI and Me: The Hidden Work bridge University Press. panions and European Law.” MIT Case Studies in So- of Building and Maintaining an Augmentative Partner- cial and Ethical Responsibilities of Computing (Winter ship.” Personal and Ubiquitous Computing: 1–14. Bresnahan, T. 2024. “What Innovation Paths for AI to 2023): 2–23 Become a GPT?” Journal of Economics & Management Boussioux, L., Lane, J. N., Zhang, M., Jacimovic, V., Strategy 33(2): 305–316. Bommasani, R., Hudson, D. A., Adeli, E., Altman, R., and Lakhani, K. R. 2024. “The Crowdless Future? Arora, S., von Arx, S., Bernstein, M. S., and others. Generative AI and Creative Problem-Solving.” Organi- Brinkmann, L., Baumann, F., Bonnefon, J.-F., Derex, 2021. “On the Opportunities and Risks of Foundation zation Science 35(5): 1589–1607. M., Müller, T. F., Nussberger, A.-M., Czaplicka, A., and Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.07258. others. 2023. “Machine Culture.” Nature Human Be- Boustan, L. P., Choi, J., and Clingingsmith, D. 2022. haviour 7(11): 1855–1868. “Computerized Machine Tools and the Transformation 226 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Brockway, P. E., Sorrell, S., Semieniuk, G., Heun, M. Brynjolfsson, E., Kim, S. T., and Oh, J. H. 2024. “The Cao, C., Sang, J., Arora, R., Kloosterman, R., Cecere, K., and Court, V. 2021. “Energy Efficiency and Econo- Attention Economy: Measuring the Value of Free M., Gorla, J., Saleh, R., and others. 2024. “Prompting my-Wide Rebound Effects: A Review of the Evidence Goods on the Internet.” Information Systems Research Is All You Need: LLMs for Systematic Review Screen- and Its Implications.” Renewable and Sustainable En- 35(3): 978–991. ing.” medRxiv: 2024.2006. 2001.24308323. ergy Reviews 141: 110781. Brynjolfsson, E., Li, D., and Raymond, L. 2025. “Gen- Cao, S., Jiang, W., Wang, J., and Yang, B. 2024. Brollo, F., Dabla-Norris, M. E., de Mooij, M. R., Garcia- erative AI at Work.” The Quarterly Journal of Econom- “From Man Vs. Machine to Man+ Machine: The Art and Macia, M. D., Hanappi, T., Liu, M. L., and Nguyen, A. ics 140(2): 889–942. AI of Stock Analyses.” Journal of Financial Economics D. 2024. “Broadening the Gains from Generative AI: 160: 103910. The Role of Fiscal Policies.” IMF Staff Discussion Notes Brynjolfsson, E., Mitchell, T., and Rock, D. 2018. 2024/002, International Monetary Fund, Washington, “What Can Machines Learn, and What Does It Mean Cao, Y., Zhou, L., Lee, S., Cabello, L., Chen, M., and DC. for Occupations and the Economy?” AEA Papers and Hershcovich, D. 2023. “Assessing Cross-Cultural Proceedings 108: 43–47. Alignment between ChatGPT and Human Societies: An Brooke, S. 2023. “Trouble in Programmer’s Paradise: Empirical Study.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.17466. Gender-Biases in Sharing and Recognising Technical Buera, F. J., Kaboski, J. P., and Townsend, R. M. Knowledge on Stack Overflow.” Information, Communi- 2023. “From Micro to Macro Development.” Journal of Caplin, A. 2025a. “Data Engineering for Cognitive Eco- cation & Society 24(14): 2019–2112. Economic Literature 61(2): 471–503. nomics.” Journal of Economic Literature 63(1): 164–196. Brooke, S. 2024. “Programmed Differently? Testing Buntz, B. 2024. “Quality Vs. Quantity: Us and China Caplin, A. 2025b. An Introduction to Cognitive Eco- for Gender Differences in Python Programming Style Chart Different Paths in Global AI Patent Race in 2024.” nomics: The Science of Mistakes. Springer Nature. and Quality on Github.” Journal of Computer-Mediated R&D World. https://www.rdworldonline.com/quality-vs Communication 29(1): zmad049. -quantity-us-and-china-chart-different-paths-in-global Caplin, A., Deming, D. J., Li, S., Martin, D. J., Marx, -ai-patent-race-in-2024/. Accessed 1 April 2025. P., Weidmann, B., and Ye, K. J. 2024. “The ABC’s of Brown, T., Mann, B., Ryder, N., Subbiah, M., Kaplan, Who Benefits from Working with AI: Ability, Beliefs, and J. D., Dhariwal, P., Neelakantan, A., and others. Buolamwini, J., and Gebru, T. 2018. “Gender Shades: Calibration.” Working Paper 33021, National Bureau of 2020. “Language Models Are Few-Shot Learners.” Ad- Intersectional Accuracy Disparities in Commercial Gen- Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33: der Classification.” Conference on Fairness, Account- 1877–1901. ability and Transparency, PMLR, 77–91. Capraro, V., Lentsch, A., Acemoğlu, D., Akgun, S., Akhmedova, A., Bilancini, E., Bonnefon, J.-F., and Browne, M. W. 1988. “How Do You Tell a Chair from Burrage, A., Dasgupta, N., and Ganguli, I. 2025. others. 2024. “The Impact of Generative Artificial Intel- a Cat? Scientists Say You Could Ask a Pigeon.” The “Gender Diversity in Academic Entrepreneurship: So- ligence on Socioeconomic Inequalities and Policy Mak- New York Times, 6 December. https://www.nytimes cial Impact Motives and the NSF I-Corps Program.” Re- ing.” PNAS Nexus 3(6). .com/1988/12/06/science/how-do-you-tell-a-chair-from search Policy 54(3): 105169. -a-cat-scientists-say-you-could-ask-a-pigeon.html. Cardarelli, L. 2024. “Pypotterylens: An Open-Source Bursztyn, L., Handel, B. R., Jimenez, R., and Roth, C. Deep Learning Framework for Automated Digitisation Browne, O., Gazze, L., Greenstone, M., and Rostap- 2023. “When Product Markets Become Collective Traps: of Archaeological Pottery Documentation.” arXiv pre- shova, O. 2023. “Man Vs. Machine: Technological The Case of Social Media.” Working Paper 31771, National print arXiv:2412.11574. Promise and Political Limits of Automated Regulation Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. https:// Enforcement.” Working Paper 30816, National Bureau www.nber.org/papers/w31771. Accessed 17 March 2025. Carlsmith, J. 2022. “Is Power-Seeking AI an Existential of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Risk?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.13353. Burton, J. W., Lopez-Lopez, E., Hechtlinger, S., Rah- Browne, R. 2024. “Why Big Tech Is Turning to Nuclear wan, Z., Aeschbach, S., Bakker, M. A., Becker, J. A., Carmichael, M. 2024. The Ipsos AI Monitor 2024. to Power Its Energy-Intensive AI Ambitions.” CNBC, 16 and others. 2024. “How Large Language Models Can Ipsos. October. Reshape Collective Intelligence.” Nature Human Be- haviour 8(9): 1643–1655. Carter, B., Payne, M., Rees, P., Sohn, S. Y., Brown, J., Browning, J., and LeCun, Y. 2022. “AI and the Limits of and Kalk, N. J. 2024. “A Multi-School Study in England, Language.” Noema Magazine. Caballero, J., Doerr, S., Mehrotra, A., and Zampolli, F. to Assess Problematic Smartphone Usage and Anxiety 2025. How Far Can Digital Innovation Improve Credit and Depression.” Acta Paediatrica 113(10): 2240–2248. Brynjolfsson, E. 2022. “The Turing Trap: The Promise to Small Firms in Emerging Market Economies? Bank & Peril of Human-Like Artificial Intelligence.” Daedalus for International Settlements. Carvalho, J.-P. 2025. “The Political-Economic Risks of 151(2): 272–287. AI.” Department of Economics Discussion Paper Series. Caetano, A., Verma, K., Taheri, A., Kumaran, R., University of Oxford. Brynjolfsson, E., and Hitt, L. M. 2000. “Beyond Com- Chen, Z., Chen, J., Höllerer, T., and Sra, M. 2025. putation: Information Technology, Organizational Trans- “Agentic Workflows for Conversational Human-AI Inter- Catena, E., Tummolini, L., and Santucci, V. G. 2025. formation and Business Performance.” Journal of Eco- action Design.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.18002. “Human Autonomy with AI in the Loop.” Philosophical nomic Perspectives 14(4): 23–48. Psychology: 1–28. Caliskan, A., Bryson, J. J., and Narayanan, A. 2017. Brynjolfsson, E., Collis, A., Diewert, W. E., Eggers, F., “Semantics Derived Automatically from Language Cor- Caton, S., and Haas, C. 2024. “Fairness in Machine and Fox, K. J. Forthcoming. “GDP-B: Accounting for pora Contain Human-Like Biases.” Science 356(6334): Learning: A Survey.” ACM Computing Surveys 56(7): the Value of New and Free Goods in the Digital Econ- 183–186. Article 166. omy.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics. Callaway, E. 2022. “What’s Next for the AI Protein- Caunedo, J., Keller, E., and Shin, Y. 2023. “Technol- Brynjolfsson, E., Collis, A., Liaqat, A., Kutzman, D., Folding Revolution.” Nature 604(7905): 234–238. ogy and the Task Content of Jobs across the Devel- Garro, H., Deisenroth, D., Wernerfelt, N., and Lee, opment Spectrum.” The World Bank Economic Review J. J. 2023. “The Digital Welfare of Nations: New Mea- Campens, J., Vercruyssen, A., Schirmer, W., Verté, 37(3): 479–493. sures of Welfare Gains and Inequality.” Working Paper E., and De Witte, N. 2023. “The Association between 31670, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam- Internet Non-Use and Multidimensional Frailty in Older Cave, S., and Dihal, K. 2019. “Hopes and Fears for bridge, MA. Adults: A Three-Wave Cross-Sectional Study from Intelligent Machines in Fiction and Reality.” Nature Ma- 2004 to 2021.” Behaviour & Information Technology chine Intelligence 1(2): 74–78. Brynjolfsson, E., Jin, W., and Wang, X. 2023. “Infor- 43(10): 1957–1971. mation Technology, Firm Size, and Industrial Concen- Cave, S., and Dihal, K. 2023. Imagining AI: How the tration.” Working Paper 31065, National Bureau of Eco- Cantwell Smith, B. 2019. The Promise of Artificial In- World Sees Intelligent Machines. Oxford, UK: Oxford nomic Research, Cambridge, MA. telligence: Reckoning and Judgment. Cambridge, MA: University Press. MIT Press. REFERENCES 227 Cave, S., Dihal, K., Drage, E., and McInerney, K. Crop Water Stress Using Deep Learning Models.” Neu- Chen, Y., Liu, T. X., Shan, Y., and Zhong, S. 2023. 2023. “Who Makes AI? Gender and Portrayals of AI ral Computing and Applications 33(10): 5353–5367. “The Emergence of Economic Rationality of GPT.” Pro- Scientists in Popular Film, 1920–2020.” Public Under- ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120(51): standing of Science 32(6): 745–760. Chandran, R. 2023. “Indigenous Groups in NZ, US e2316205120. Fear Colonization as AI Learns Their Languages.” Re- Cavender-Bares, J., Gamon, J. A., and Townsend, P. uters, 3 April. Chen, Y., Liu, T. X., Shan, Y., and Zhong, S. 2023. A. 2020. Remote Sensing of Plant Biodiversity. Spring- “The Emergence of Economic Rationality of GPT.” Pro- er Nature. Chang, D., Pang, K., Du, R., Tong, Y., Song, Y.-Z., Ma, ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120(51): Z., and Guo, J. 2023. “Making a Bird AI Expert Work e2316205120. Cazzaniga, M., Jaumotte, M. F., Li, L., Melina, M. G., for You and Me.” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis Panton, A. J., Pizzinelli, C., Rockall, E. J., and Tavares, and Machine Intelligence 45(10): 12068–12084. Cheng, A. Y., Guo, M., Ran, M., Ranasaria, A., Shar- M. M. M. 2024. “Gen-AI: Artificial Intelligence and the ma, A., Xie, A., Le, K. N., and others. 2024. “Scien- Future of Work.” IMF Staff Discussion Notes 2024/001, Charlesworth, T. E., Caliskan, A., and Banaji, M. R. tific and Fantastical: Creating Immersive, Culturally International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 2022. “Historical Representations of Social Groups Relevant Learning Experiences with Augmented Real- across 200 Years of Word Embeddings from Google ity and Large Language Models.” Proceedings of the CCDH (Center for Countering Digital Hate). 2023. “AI Books.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- 2024 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Comput- and Eating Disorders: How Generative AI Enables and ences 119(28): e2121798119. ing Systems. Honolulu, HI: Association for Computing Promotes Harmful Eating Disorder Content.” London. Machinery. https://counterhate.com/research/ai-tools-and-eating Charlesworth, T. E., Ghate, K., Caliskan, A., and Ban- -disorders/. Accessed 8 November 2024. aji, M. R. 2024. “Extracting Intersectional Stereotypes Chetty, R., Jackson, M. O., Kuchler, T., Stroebel, J., from Embeddings: Developing and Validating the Flex- Hendren, N., Fluegge, R. B., Gong, S., and others. Celi, L. A., Cellini, J., Charpignon, M.-L., Dee, E. C., ible Intersectional Stereotype Extraction Procedure.” 2022a. “Social Capital I: Measurement and Associa- Dernoncourt, F., Eber, R., Mitchell, W. G., and others. PNAS Nexus 3(3): pgae089. tions with Economic Mobility.” Nature 2022 608:7921 2022. “Sources of Bias in Artificial Intelligence That 608(7921): 108–121. Perpetuate Healthcare Disparities—a Global Review.” Chen, C., and Zheng, Y. 2024. “When Consumers Need PLOS Digital Health 1(3): e0000022. More Interpretability of Artificial Intelligence (AI) Recom- Chetty, R., Jackson, M. O., Kuchler, T., Stroebel, J., mendations? The Effect of Decision-Making Domains.” Hendren, N., Fluegge, R. B., Gong, S., and others. Cerf, V. G. 2024. “The Global Digital Compact.” Com- Behaviour & Information Technology 43(14): 3481–3489. 2022b. “Social Capital II: Determinants of Economic munications of the ACM 67(10): 5–5. Connectedness.” Nature 2022 608:7921 608(7921): Chen, D., Chen, Y., Rege, A., and Vinayak, R. K. 122–134. Chabert, J.-L., and Barbin, É. 1999. A History of Al- 2024. “PAL: Pluralistic Alignment Framework for Learn- gorithms: From the Pebble to the Microchip. Springer. ing from Heterogeneous Preferences.” arXiv preprint Chiaburu, D. S., and Harrison, D. A. 2008. “Do arXiv:2406.08469. Peers Make the Place? Conceptual Synthesis and Chaix, B., Bibault, J.-E., Pienkowski, A., Delamon, G., Meta-Analysis of Coworker Effects on Perceptions, At- Guillemassé, A., Nectoux, P., and Brouard, B. 2019. Chen, J. J., and Lin, J. C. 2023. “Artificial Intelligence titudes, OCBs, and Performance.” Journal of Applied “When Chatbots Meet Patients: One-Year Prospective as a Double-Edged Sword: Wielding the Power Prin- Psychology 93(5): 1082. Study of Conversations between Patients with Breast ciples to Maximize Its Positive Effects and Minimize Its Cancer and a Chatbot.” JMIR Cancer 5(1): e12856. Negative Effects.” Contemporary Issues in Early Child- Child Rescue Coalition. 2024. “The Dark Side of AI: hood: 14639491231169813. Risks to Children.” https://childrescuecoalition.org Chakraborty, C., Bhattacharya, M., Lee, S.-S., Wen, /educations/the-dark-side-of-ai-risks-to-children/. Ac- Z.-H., and Lo, Y.-H. 2024. “The Changing Scenario of Chen, J., Lin, H., Han, X., and Sun, L. 2024. “Bench- cessed 1 October 2024. Drug Discovery Using AI to Deep Learning: Recent Ad- marking Large Language Models in Retrieval-Augment- vancement, Success Stories, Collaborations, and Chal- ed Generation.” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference ChildFund International and African Child Policy Fo- lenges.” Molecular Therapy Nucleic Acids 35(3). on Artificial Intelligence, 17754–17762. rum. 2024. “Online Exploitation and Abuse of Children in Africa on the Rise.” https://childfundalliance.org/2024 Chakraborty, N., Ornik, M., and Driggs-Campbell, K. Chen, K., Duan, Z., and Kim, S. J. 2024. “Uncover- /05/30/online-exploitation-and-abuse-of-children-in 2025. “Hallucination Detection in Foundation Models ing Gender Stereotypes in Controversial Science Dis- -africa-on-the-rise/. Accessed 1 November 2024. for Decision-Making: A Flexible Definition and Review course: Evidence from Computational Text and Visual of the State of the Art.” https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv Analyses across Digital Platforms.” Journal of Comput- Childlight. 2024. “Global Prevalence of Online Vic- .2403.16527. er-Mediated Communication 29(1): zmad052. timisation.” https://intothelight.childlight.org/indicator -1.html. Accessed 27 September 2024. Chan Miller, C., Roche, S., Wilzewski, J. S., Liu, X., Chen, L., Zaharia, M., and Zou, J. 2024. “How Is Chat- Chance, K., Souri, A. H., Conway, E., and others. GPT’s Behavior Changing over Time?” Harvard Data Chiplunkar, G., and Goldberg, P. K. 2022. “The Em- 2024. “Methane Retrieval from Methaneair Using the Science Review 6(2). ployment Effects of Mobile Internet in Developing Co2 Proxy Approach: A Demonstration for the Upcom- Countries.” Working Paper 30741, National Bureau of ing Methanesat Mission.” Atmospheric Measurement Chen, R. J., Wang, J. J., Williamson, D. F., Chen, T. Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Techniques 17(18): 5429–5454. Y., Lipkova, J., Lu, M. Y., Sahai, S., and Mahmood, F. 2023. “Algorithmic Fairness in Artificial Intelligence Chitturi, S. R., Ramdas, A., Wu, Y., Rohr, B., Ermon, S., Chan, H. Y., and Muralidharan, A. 2024. “Care Ro- for Medicine and Healthcare.” Nature biomedical engi- Dionne, J., Jornada, F. H. d., and others. 2024. “Tar- bots for the Elderly: Legal, Ethical Considerations and neering 7(6): 719–742. geted Materials Discovery Using Bayesian Algorithm Regulatory Strategies.” Developments in Intellectual Execution.” NPJ Computational Materials 10(1): 1–12. Property Strategy: The Impact of Artificial Intelligence, Chen, W.-R., Adebara, I., Doan, K. D., Liao, Q., and Robotics and New Technologies. Springer. Abdul-Mageed, M. 2023. “Fumbling in Babel: An In- Cho, J., Cokely, E. T., Ramasubramanian, M., Al- vestigation into ChatGPT’s Language Identification lan, J. N., Feltz, A., and Garcia-Retamero, R. 2024. Chan, R. C. 2022. “A Social Cognitive Perspective on Ability.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.09696. “Numeracy Does Not Polarize Climate Change Judg- Gender Disparities in Self-Efficacy, Interest, and Aspira- ments: Numerate People Are More Knowledgeable tions in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math- Chen, X., and Wu, D. 2024. “Automatic Generation of and Knowledge Is Power.” American Psychological As- ematics (STEM): The Influence of Cultural and Gender Multimedia Teaching Materials Based on Generative AI: sociation 11(2): 320–344. Norms.” International Journal of STEM Education 9(1): Taking Tang Poetry as an Example.” IEEE Transactions 1–13. on Learning Technologies 17: 1327–1340. Choi, S. L., Jain, R., Emami, P., Wadsack, K., Ding, F., Sun, H., Gruchalla, K., and others. 2024. “eGridGPT: Chandel, N. S., Chakraborty, S. K., Rajwade, Y. A., Chen, X., Pei, G., Song, Z., and Zilibotti, F. 2023. “Ter- Trustworthy AI in the Control Room.” Technical Report Dubey, K., Tiwari, M. K., and Jat, D. 2021. “Identifying tiarization Like China.” Annual Review of Economics 15: NREL/TP-5D00-87440, National Renewable Energy 485–512. Laboratory (NREL), Golden, CO. 228 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Chopra, D., and Krishnan, M. 2022. “‘Care Is Not a Cohn, A., Gesche, T., and Maréchal, M. A. 2022. Inequality.” BIS Working Papers 1135, Bank for Interna- Burden’: A 7-4-7 Framework of Action for Operationalis- “Honesty in the Digital Age.” Management Science tional Settlements. ing the Triple R.” Gender & Development 30(1-2): 35–57. 68(2): 827–845. Corredor-Waldron, A., and Currie, J. 2024. “To What Choudhury, A., Renjilian, E., and Asan, O. 2020. Collier, P., and Tuckett, D. 2021. “Narratives as a Coor- Extent Are Trends in Teen Mental Health Driven by “Use of Machine Learning in Geriatric Clinical Care dinating Device for Reversing Regional Disequilibrium.” Changes in Reporting?: The Example of Suicide-Relat- for Chronic Diseases: A Systematic Literature Review.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 37(1): 97–112. ed Hospital Visits.” Journal of Human Resources 59(S): JAMIA open 3(3): 459–471. S14–S40. Collins, K. M., Jiang, A. Q., Frieder, S., Wong, L., Zil- Christensen, F. 2022. “Streaming Stimulates the Live ka, M., Bhatt, U., Lukasiewicz, T., and others. 2024a. Corrigan, N. M., Rokem, A., and Kuhl, P. K. 2024. Concert Industry: Evidence from Youtube.” Internation- “Evaluating Language Models for Mathematics through “Covid-19 Lockdown Effects on Adolescent Brain Struc- al Journal of Industrial Organization 85: 102873. Interactions.” Proceedings of the National Academy of ture Suggest Accelerated Maturation That Is More Pro- Sciences 121(24): e2318124121. nounced in Females Than in Males.” Proceedings of the Christian, B. 2021. The Alignment Problem: How Can National Academy of Sciences 121(38): e2403200121. Machines Learn Human Values? New York: W.W. Nor- Collins, K. M., Sucholutsky, I., Bhatt, U., Chandra, K., ton & Company. Wong, L., Lee, M., Zhang, C. E., and others. 2024b. Corso, A., Moss, R., Koren, M., Lee, R., and Ko- “Building Machines That Learn and Think with People.” chenderfer, M. 2021. “A Survey of Algorithms for Black- Chronis, C., Varlamis, I., Himeur, Y., Sayed, A. N., Nature Human Behaviour 8(10): 1851–1863. Box Safety Validation of Cyber-Physical Systems.” Jour- Hasan, T. M. A.-., Nhlabatsi, A., Bensaali, F., and Dim- nal of Artificial Intelligence Research 72: 377–428. itrakopoulos, G. 2024. “A Survey on the Use of Fed- The Computational Democracy Project. 2025. “Po- erated Learning in Privacy-Preserving Recommender lis.” https://pol.is/home. Costa, E. 2018. “Affordances-in-Practice: An Ethno- Systems.” IEEE Open Journal of the Computer Society graphic Critique of Social Media Logic and Context 5: 227–247. Comunale, M., and Manera, A. 2024. “The Economic Collapse.” New Media & Society 20(10): 3641–3656. Impacts and the Regulation of AI: A Review of the Aca- Chu, C. H., Donato-Woodger, S., Khan, S. S., Nyrup, demic Literature and Policy Actions.” Working Paper Costa-jussà, M. R., Cross, J., Çelebi, O., Elbayad, M., R., Leslie, K., Lyn, A., Shi, T., and others. 2023. “Age- 2024/065, International Monetary Fund, Washington, Heafield, K., Heffernan, K., Kalbassi, E., and others. Related Bias and Artificial Intelligence: A Scoping Re- DC. 2024. “Scaling Neural Machine Translation to 200 Lan- view.” Humanities and Social Sciences Communica- guages.” Nature 630(8018): 841–846. tions 10(1): 1–17. Conboye, J. 2025. “Companies Are Failing to Con- vince Staff of AI Benefits.” Financial Times, 6 March. Costa-Jussà, M. R., Cross, J., Çelebi, O., Elbayad, M., Chua, J., Li, Y., Yang, S., Wang, C., and Yao, L. 2024. https://www.ft.com/content/82ba88bb-ab33-4baa Heafield, K., Heffernan, K., Kalbassi, E., Lam, J., and “AI Safety in Generative AI Large Language Models: A -ae6b-f891ea437921. Licht, D. 2022. “No Language Left Behind: Scaling Survey.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.18369. Human-Centered Machine Translation.” arXiv preprint Conceição, P. 2019. “Fear and Loathing of Technologi- arXiv:2207.04672. Chun, Y., Hur, J., and Hwang, J. 2024. “AI Technology cal Progress? Leveraging Science and Innovation for Specialization and National Competitiveness.” Plos one the Implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustain- Costello, T. H., Pennycook, G., and Rand, D. G. 19(4): e0301091. able Development.” Public Service Excellence in the 2024. “Durably Reducing Conspiracy Beliefs through 21st Century: 31–52. Dialogues with AI.” Science 385(6714): eadq1814. Clegg, A., Bandeen-Roche, K., Farrin, A., Forster, A., Gill, T. M., Gladman, J., Kerse, N., and others. 2022. Condorcet, M. d. 1785. “Essay on the Application of Cottier, B., R. Rahman, L. Fattorini, N. Maslej and “New Horizons in Evidence-Based Care for Older Peo- Analysis to the Probability of Majority Decisions.” Paris: D. Owen. 2024. “The Rising Costs of Training Fron- ple: Individual Participant Data Meta-Analysis.” Age and Imprimerie Royale. tier AI Models.” ArXiv preprint. https://arxiv.org/ Ageing 51(4): afac090. abs/2405.21015. Conover, M. D., Ratkiewicz, J., Francisco, M., Gon- Clusmann, J., Kolbinger, F. R., Muti, H. S., Carrero, Z. çalves, B., Flammini, A., and Menczer, F. 2011. “Po- Council of Europe. 2019. “Declaration by the Commit- I., Eckardt, J.-N., Laleh, N. G., Löffler, C. M. L., and oth- litical Polarization on Twitter.” Proceedings of the Inter- tee of Ministers on the Manipulative Capabilities of Al- ers. 2023. “The Future Landscape of Large Language national AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media gorithmic Processes.” https://search.coe.int/cm/pages Models in Medicine.” Communications Medicine 3(1): 141. 5(1): 89–96. /result_details.aspx?ObjectId=090000168092dd4b . Accessed 23 May 2024. Coavoux, M., Elsahar, H., and Gallé, M. 2019. “Un- Constantinides, M., and Quercia, D. 2025. “The Im- supervised Aspect-Based Multi-Document Abstractive pact of AI on Jobs: HCI Is Missing.” arXiv preprint arXiv: Counted, V., Cowden, R. G., and Lomas, T. 2024. Summarization.” Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on 2501.18948. “Multidimensional Flourishing in Africa: An Intraconti- New Frontiers in Summarization, 42–47. nental Analysis of 38 Well-Being Indicators in 40 Coun- Cordier, T., Esling, P., Lejzerowicz, F., Visco, J., Oua- tries.” Journal of Happiness Studies 25(51): 51. Cobb, P. J. 2023. “Large Language Models and Gener- dahi, A., Martins, C., Cedhagen, T., and Pawlowski, ative AI, Oh My!: Archaeology in the Time of ChatGPT, J. 2017. “Predicting the Ecological Quality Status of Cowan, R. S. 2023. More Work for Mother: The Ironies Midjourney, and Beyond.” Advances in Archaeological Marine Environments from Edna Metabarcoding Data of Household Technology from the Open Hearth to the Practice 11(3): 363–369. Using Supervised Machine Learning.” Environmental Microwave. Plunkett Lake Press. Science & Technology 51(16): 9118–9126. Cockburn, I. M., Henderson, R., and Stern, S. 2019. Coyle, D. 2025. The Measure of Progress: Counting “The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Innovation: An Cordier, T., Forster, D., Dufresne, Y., Martins, C. I. M., What Really Matters. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer- Exploratory Analysis.” In Ajay, A., Joshua, G., and Avi, G., Stoeck, T., and Pawlowski, J. 2018. “Supervised Ma- sity Press. (eds.), The Economics of Artificial Intelligence. Chicago, chine Learning Outperforms Taxonomy-Based Environ- IL: University of Chicago Press. mental DNA Metabarcoding Applied to Biomonitoring.” Coyle, D., and Selvi, B.S. 2024. “Making Innovation Molecular Ecology Resources 18(6): 1381–1391. Inclusive.” Productivity Insights Paper 039, The Produc- Coeckelbergh, M. 2022. Robot Ethics. MIT Press. tivity Institute. Corkin, M. T., Peterson, E. R., Henderson, A. M., Coeckelbergh, M. 2024. Why AI Undermines Democ- Waldie, K. E., Reese, E., and Morton, S. M. 2021. “Pre- Crafts, N. 2021. “Artificial Intelligence as a General- racy and What to Do About It. Cambridge, UK: Polity school Screen Media Exposure, Executive Functions Purpose Technology: An Historical Perspective.” Ox- Press. and Symptoms of Inattention/Hyperactivity.” Journal of ford Review of Economic Policy 37(3): 521–536. Applied Developmental Psychology 73: 101237. Cohen, M. K., Kolt, N., Bengio, Y., Hadfield, G. K., Craig, C., Cave, S., Dihal, K., Dillon, S., Montgomery, and Russell, S. 2024. “Regulating Advanced Artificial Cornelli, G., Frost, J., and Mishra, S. 2023. “Artifi- J., Singler, B., and Taylor, L. 2018. “Portrayals and Agents.” Science 384(6691): 36–38. cial Intelligence, Services Globalisation and Income REFERENCES 229 Perceptions of AI and Why They Matter.” The Royal So- Dae-Hyun. 2024. “South Korea Unveils Plans for de Rassenfosse, G., Jaffe, A. B., and Waldfogel, J. ciety. Retrieved December 15: 2020. National AI Computing Center with $1.7 Billion Invest- 2025. “Intellectual Property and Creative Machines.” In ment.” https://koreatechtoday.com/south-korea-unveils Jones, B. F., and Lerner, J., (eds.), Entrepreneurship and Creutzig, F., Acemoğlu, D., Bai, X., Edwards, P. N., -plans-for-national-ai-computing-center-with-1-7-billion Innovation Policy and the Economy. Hintz, M. J., Kaack, L. H., Kilkis, S., and others. 2022. -investment/. Accessed 1 April 2025. “Digitalization and the Anthropocene.” Annual Review de Roda Husman, S., Lhermitte, S., Bolibar, J., Ize- of Environment and Resources 47: 479–509. Dahl, M., Magesh, V., Suzgun, M., and Ho, D. E. boud, M., Hu, Z., Shukla, S., van der Meer, M., Long, 2024. “Large Legal Fictions: Profiling Legal Halluci- D., and Wouters, B. 2024. “A High-Resolution Record Criddle, C. 2025. “Openai Reveals GPT-4.5 Amid nations in Large Language Models.” Journal of Legal of Surface Melt on Antarctic Ice Shelves Using Multi- Flurry of New AI Model Releases.” Financial Times, 27 Analysis 16(1): 64–93. Source Remote Sensing Data and Deep Learning.” Re- February. https://www.ft.com/content/117ec9b2-745d mote Sensing of Environment 301: 113950. -4c37-bfc4-6e545a7d3ac1. Danaher, J. 2024. “Generative AI and the Future of Equality Norms.” Cognition 251: 105906. de Silva de Alwis, R. 2024. “A Rapidly Shifting Land- Crisanto, J., Leuterio, C., Prenio, J., and Yong, J. 2024. scape: Why Digitized Violence Is the Newest Category “Regulating AI in the Financial Sector: Recent Develop- Dangi, R. R., Sharma, A., and Vageriya, V. 2025. of Gender-Based Violence.” La Revue des Juristes de ments and Main Challenges.” Bank for International “Transforming Healthcare in Low-Resource Settings Sciences Po (25): 62. Settlements, FSI Insights on Policy Implementation (63). with Artificial Intelligence: Recent Developments and Outcomes.” Public Health Nursing forthcoming. De Simone, M., Tiberti, F., Mosuro, W., Manolio, F., Crootof, R., Kaminski, M. E., and Price, W. N. I. 2023. Barron, M., and Dikoru, E. 2025. “From Chalkboards “Humans in the Loop.” Vanderbilt Law Review 76(2): Danry, V., Pataranutaporn, P., Mao, Y., and Maes, P. to Chatbots: Transforming Learning in Nigeria, One 429–510. 2023. “Don’t Just Tell Me, Ask Me: AI Systems That Promt at a Time.” World Bank blogs. https://blogs Intelligently Frame Explanations as Questions Improve .worldbank.org/en/education/From-chalkboards-to Crootof, R., Kaminski, M. E., Price, W., and Nicholson, Human Logical Discernment Accuracy over Causal AI -chatbots-Transforming-learning-in-Nigeria. Accessed I. 2023. “Humans in the Loop.” Vand. L. Rev. 76: 429. Explanations.” Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Confer- 3 April 2025. ence on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Ham- Cross, S., and Estrada, R. 1995. “DART: An Example of burg, Germany: Association for Computing Machinery. de V. Cavalcanti, T. V., and Tavares, J. 2008. “Assess- Accelerated Evolutionary Development.” Proceedings ing the ‘Engines of Liberation:’ Home Appliances and of the International Workshop on Rapid System Proto- Das, B. C., Amini, M. H., and Wu, Y. 2025. “Security Female Labor Force Participation.” The Review of Eco- typing: 177–183. and Privacy Challenges of Large Language Models: A nomics and Statistics 90(1): 81–88. Survey.” ACM Computing Surveys 57(6): 1–39. Cubaynes, H. C., and Fretwell, P. T. 2022. “Whales del Rio-Chanona, R. M., Laurentsyeva, N., and from Space Dataset, an Annotated Satellite Image Das, S., Stanton, R., and Wallace, N. 2023. “Algorith- Wachs, J. 2024. “Large Language Models Reduce Dataset of Whales for Training Machine Learning Mod- mic Fairness.” Annual Review of Financial Economics Public Knowledge Sharing on Online Q&Amp;a Plat- els.” Scientific Data 9(1): 245. 15: 565–593. forms.” PNAS Nexus 3(9). Cucio, M., and Hennig, T. 2025. “Artificial Intel- DataGenero. 2024. “Feminisms in Artificial Intelli- Delanerolle, G., Yang, X., Shetty, S., Raymont, V., ligence and the Philippine Labor Market: Mapping gence: Automation Tools Towards a Feminist Judiciary Shetty, A., Phiri, P., Hapangama, D. K., and others. Occupational Exposure and Complementarity.” Work- Reform in Argentina and Mexico.” https://feministai 2021. “Artificial Intelligence: A Rapid Case for Ad- ing Paper 2025/043, IMF Washington, DC. https:// .pubpub.org/pub/z83eyq54/release/1. Accessed 28 vancement in the Personalization of Gynaecology/ www.imf.org/en/Publications/WP/Issues/2025/02/21 April 2025. Obstetric and Mental Health Care.” Women’s Health 17: /Artificial-Intelligence-and-the-Philippine-Labor-Market 17455065211018111. -Mapping-Occupational-Exposure-and-562171?cid=em Datareportal. 2024. “The Time We Spend on So- -COM-789-49741. Accessed 26 February 2025. cial Media.” https://datareportal.com/reports/digital Delaporte, I., and Peña, W. 2025. “The Dynamics of -2024-deep-dive-the-time-we-spend-on-social-media Disappearing Routine Jobs in Chile: An Analysis of the Cui, H., and Yasseri, T. 2024. “AI-Enhanced Collective ?utm_source=Global_Digital_Reports&utm_medium Link between Deroutinisation and Informality.” World Intelligence.” Patterns 5(11). =Analysis_Article&utm_campaign=Digital_2024&utm Development 189: 106923. _content=Digital_2024_Analysis_And_Review. Ac- Cui, Z., Li, N., and Zhou, H. 2024. “Can AI Replace cessed 6 January 2025. Delgado-Chaves, F. M., Jennings, M. J., Atalaia, A., Human Subjects? A Large-Scale Replication of Psycho- Wolff, J., Horvath, R., Mamdouh, Z. M., Baumbach, logical Experiments with LLMs.” arXiv preprint arXiv: Dauvergne, P. 2022. “Is Artificial Intelligence Greening J., and Baumbach, L. 2025. “Transforming Literature 2409.00128. Global Supply Chains? Exposing the Political Economy Screening: The Emerging Role of Large Language of Environmental Costs.” Review of International Politi- Models in Systematic Reviews.” Proceedings of the Na- Cunningham, T., Pandey, S., Sigerson, L., Stray, J., cal Economy 29(3): 696–718. tional Academy of Sciences 122(2): e2411962122. Allen, J., Barrilleaux, B., Iyer, R., and others. 2024. “What We Know About Using Non-Engagement Signals de Freitas, M. P., Piai, V. A., Farias, R. H., Fernandes, d’Elia, A., Gabbay, M., Rodgers, S., Kierans, C., in Content Ranking.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06831. A. M., de Moraes Rossetto, A. G., and Leithardt, V. Jones, E., Durrani, I., Thomas, A., and Frith, L. 2022. R. Q. 2022. “Artificial Intelligence of Things Applied to “Artificial Intelligence and Health Inequities in Primary Current AI. n.d. “Building AI Together, Unlocking Op- Assistive Technology: A Systematic Literature Review.” Care: A Systematic Scoping Review and Framework.” portunity for All.” https://www.currentai.org/. Accessed Sensors 22(21): 8531. Family medicine and community health 10(Suppl 1). 1 April 2025. De Loecker, J., and Eeckhout, J. 2018. “Global Market Dell, M. 2024. “Deep Learning for Economists.” Work- Czaplicka, A., Baumann, F., and Rahwan, I. 2024. Power.” Working Paper 24768, National Bureau of Eco- ing Paper 32768, National Bureau of Economic Re- “Mutual Benefits of Social Learning and Algorithmic Me- nomic Research, Cambridge, MA. search, Cambridge, MA. diation for Cumulative Culture.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410 .00780. De Loecker, J., Eeckhout, J., and Unger, G. 2020. Dell’Acqua, F., McFowland III, E., Mollick, E. R., Lif- “The Rise of Market Power and the Macroeconomic Im- shitz-Assaf, H., Kellogg, K., Rajendran, S., Krayer, L., D’Silva, D., Filková, Z., Packer, F., and Tiwari, S. 2019. plications.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 135(2): Candelon, F., and Lakhani, K. R. 2023. “Navigating “The Design of Digital Financial Infrastructure: Lessons 561–644. the Jagged Technological Frontier: Field Experimental from India.” BIS Paper (106). Evidence of the Effects of AI on Knowledge Worker De Neubourg, C., Praet, S., Carrera Manzano, M., Productivity and Quality.” Technology & Operations da Silveira, C. B. L., Strenzel, G. M. R., Maida, M., and Karpati, J. 2025. “Harnessing Digital Innovations Management Unit Working Paper 24-013, Harvard Busi- Gaspar, A. L. B., and Ferreira, B. P. 2021. “Coral Reef for Adaptive Social Protection in the Face of Climate ness School, Cambridge, MA. Mapping with Remote Sensing and Machine Learning: Change.” Social Policy Research Institute (Background A Nurture and Nature Analysis in Marine Protected Ar- Research Paper - Next Generation of Human Develop- eas.” Remote Sensing 13(15): 2907. ment Research (HDR 2025)). 230 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Deming, D. J. 2017. “The Growing Importance of So- Doellgast, V. 2023. “Strengthening Social Regulation Du, Y., Li, S., Torralba, A., Tenenbaum, J. B., and Mor- cial Skills in the Labor Market.” The Quarterly Journal of in the Digital Economy: Comparative Findings from the datch, I. 2023. “Improving Factuality and Reasoning in Economics 132(4): 1593–1640. ICT Industry.” Labour and Industry 33(1): 22–38. Language Models through Multiagent Debate.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14325. Deming, D. J., Ong, C., and Summers, L. H. 2025. Doellgast, V., Appalla, S., Ginzburg, D., Kim, J., and “Technological Disruption in the Labor Market.” Work- Thian, W. Forthcoming. “Global Case Studies of So- Dubova, M., Galesic, M., and Goldstone, R. L. 2022. ing Paper 33323, National Bureau of Economic Re- cial Dialogue on AI and Algorithmic Management.” ILO “Cognitive Science of Augmented Intelligence.” Cogni- search, Cambridge, MA. Working Paper. tive Science 46(12): e13229. Demirci, O., Hannane, J., and Zhu, X. 2025. “Who Doh, S., Choi, K., Lee, J., and Nam, J. 2023. “LP-Mu- Duclos, D., Ekzayez, A., Ghaddar, F., Checchi, F., and Is AI Replacing? The Impact of Generative AI on sicCaps: LLM-Based Pseudo Music Captioning.” arXiv Blanchet, K. 2019. “Localisation and Cross-Border As- Online Freelancing Platforms.” Management Science preprint arXiv:2307.16372. sistance to Deliver Humanitarian Health Services in forthcoming. North-West Syria: A Qualitative Inquiry for the Lancet- Donati, D., Durante, R., Sobbrio, F., and Zejcirovic, D. Aub Commission on Syria.” Conflict and Health 13: 1–10. Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L. J., Kai, L., and 2022. “Lost in the Net? Broadband Internet and Youth Li, F.-F. 2009. “Imagenet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Mental Health.” IZA Discussion Paper 15202, Institute of Duede, E., Dolan, W., Bauer, A., Foster, I., and Image Database.” 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Labor Economics. https://www.iza.org/publications/dp Lakhani, K. 2024. “Oil & Water? Diffusion of AI within Vision and Pattern Recognition, 20–25 June, 248–255. /15202/lost-in-the-net-broadband-internet-and-youth and across Scientific Fields.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405 -mental-health. Accessed 4 April 2025. .15828. Dennis, C. 2024. “What Should Be Internationalised in AI Governance?” Oxford Martin AI Governance Initiative. Dongarra, J. J., Luszczek, P., and Petitet, A. 2003. Duffield, M. 2016. “The Resilience of the Ruins: To- “The Linpack Benchmark: Past, Present and Future.” wards a Critique of Digital Humanitarianism.” Resilience Dennis, C., Clare, C., Hawkins, R., Simpson, M., Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experi- 4(3): 147–165. Behrens, E., Diebold, G., Kara, Z., and others. 2024. ence 15(9): 803–820. “What Should Be Internationalised in AI Governance?” Dunn, S., Vaillancourt, T., and Brittain, H. 2023. “Sup- Oxford Martin AI Governance Initiative. Dor, L. M. B., and Coglianese, C. 2021. “Procurement porting Safer Digital Spaces.” Centre for International as AI Governance.” IEEE Transactions on Technology Governance Innovation. Denniston, A. K., and Liu, X. 2024. “Responsible and and Society 2(4): 192–199. Evidence-Based AI: 5 Years On.” The Lancet Digital Duporge, I., Isupova, O., Reece, S., Macdonald, D. W., Health 6(5): e305–e307. Dorsch, J., and Deroy, O. 2025. “The Impact of Label- and Wang, T. 2021. “Using Very-High-Resolution Satel- ing Automotive AI as Trustworthy or Reliable on User lite Imagery and Deep Learning to Detect and Count Deroy, O. 2023. “The Ethics of Terminology: Can Evaluation and Technology Acceptance.” Scientific Re- African Elephants in Heterogeneous Landscapes.” We Use Human Terms to Describe AI?” Topoi 42(3): ports 15(1): 1481. Remote Sensing in Ecology and Conservation 7(3): 881–889. 369–381. Doshi, A. R., and Hauser, O. P. 2024. “Generative AI Dhar, D., and Thuppilikkat, A. A. 2022. “Gendered Enhances Individual Creativity but Reduces the Col- Durlik, I., Miller, T., Kostecka, E., and Tuński, T. 2024. Labour’s Positions of Vulnerabilities in Digital Labour lective Diversity of Novel Content.” Science Advances “Artificial Intelligence in Maritime Transportation: A Platforms and Strategies of Resistance: A Case Study 10(28): eadn5290. Comprehensive Review of Safety and Risk Manage- of Women Workers’ Struggle in Urban Company, New ment Applications.” Applied Sciences 14(18): 8420. Delhi.” Gender & Development 30(3): 667–686. Doshi, A. R., Bell, J. J., Mirzayev, E., and Vanneste, B. S. 2025. “Generative Artificial Intelligence and Evaluat- Dutta, S., Ranjan, S., Mishra, S., Sharma, V., Hew- Diao, X., Ellis, M., McMillan, M., and Rodrik, D. 2024. ing Strategic Decisions.” Strategic Management Jour- age, P., and Iwendi, C. 2024. “Enhancing Educational “Africa’s Manufacturing Puzzle: Evidence from Tanza- nal 46(3): 583–610. Adaptability: A Review and Analysis of AI-Driven Adap- nian and Ethiopian Firms.” The World Bank Economic tive Learning Platforms.” 4th International Conference Review. Douek, E. 2022. “Content Moderation as Systems on Innovative Practices in Technology and Manage- Thinking.” Harvard Law Review 136: 526. ment (ICIPTM), 21–23 February. Digital Economy Working Group (G20), Ministério das Comunicações (MCOM), International Tele- Dranove, D., and Garthwaite, C. L. 2024. “Artificial In- Dvijotham, K., Winkens, J., Barsbey, M., Ghaisas, S., communication Union (ITU), and Brazilian Network telligence, the Evolution of the Healthcare Value Chain, Stanforth, R., Pawlowski, N., Strachan, P., and oth- Information Center. 2024. Universal and Meaningful and the Future of the Physician.” In Agrawal, A., Gans, ers. 2023. “Enhancing the Reliability and Accuracy of Connectivity: A Framework for Indicators and Metrics. J., Goldfarb, A., and Tucker, C., (eds.), The Economics AI-Enabled Diagnosis Via Complementarity-Driven De- of Artificial Intelligence: Health Care Challenges. Cam- ferral to Clinicians.” Nature Medicine 29(7): 1814–1820. Dillion, D., Tandon, N., Gu, Y., and Gray, K. 2023. bridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research. “Can AI Language Models Replace Human Partici- Dwork, C., Hardt, M., Pitassi, T., Reingold, O., and Ze- pants?” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 27(7): 597–600. Dreyfus, H. 1972. What Computers Can’t Do: The Lim- mel, R. 2012. “Fairness through Awareness.” Proceed- its of Artificial Intelligence. New York: Harper & Row. ings of the 3rd Innovations in Theoretical Computer Ding, N., Qin, Y., Yang, G., Wei, F., Yang, Z., Su, Y., Hu, Science Conference (ITCS 12), 214–226. S., and others. 2023. “Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning Drolia, M., Papadakis, S., Sifaki, E., and Kalogianna- of Large-Scale Pre-Trained Language Models.” Nature kis, M. 2022. “Mobile Learning Applications for Refu- Dychiao, R. G. K., Alberto, I. R. I., Artiaga, J. C. M., Sa- Machine Intelligence 5(3): 220–235. gees: A Systematic Literature Review.” Education Sci- longcay, R. P., and Celi, L. A. 2024. “Large Language ences 12(2): 96. Model Integration in Philippine Ophthalmology: Early Ding, S., Liu, Z., Dong, X., Zhang, P., Qian, R., He, C., Challenges and Steps Forward.” The Lancet Digital Lin, D., and Wang, J. 2024. “Songcomposer: A Large D’Souza, S. L., and Davis, L. C. 2024. Current Per- Health 6(5): e308. Language Model for Lyric and Melody Composition in spectives on Radiology Workforce Issues and Poten- Song Generation.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17645. tial Solutions. Diagnostic Imaging [Online]. https://www Eapen, T., Finkenstadt, D. J., Folk, J., and Venkatas- .diagnosticimaging.com/view/current-perspectives wamy, L. 2023. “How Generative AI Can Augment Hu- Diouf, M. A., Perez, L. P., Simione, F. F., Viseth, A., -radiology-workforce-issues-potential-solutions. man Creativity.” Harvard Business Review 101(4). and Yao, J. 2024. A Conceptual Policy Framework for Leveraging Digitalization to Support Diversification in Du Boulay, B. 2016. “Artificial Intelligence as an Ef- Eastwood, B. 2025. “When Humans and AI Work Sub-Saharan Africa. Working Paper 2024/123, Interna- fective Classroom Assistant.” IEEE Intelligent Systems Best Together — and When Each Is Better Alone.” MIT tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC. 31(6): 76–81. https://mitsloan.mit.edu/ideas-made-to-matter/when -humans-and-ai-work-best-together-and-when-each Doellgast, V. 2022. Exit, Voice, and Solidarity: Con- Du, K., Zhao, Y., Mao, R., Xing, F., and Cambria, E. -better-alone. Accessed 16 February 2025. testing Precarity in the Us and European Telecommu- 2025. “Natural Language Processing in Finance: A Sur- nications Industries. Oxford University Press. vey.” Information Fusion 115: 102755. REFERENCES 231 Eaves, D., and Sandman, J. 2021. “What Is Digital Pub- Elkahlout, G., and Elgibali, K. 2020. “From Theory to Eteläpelto, A., Vähäsantanen, K., Hökkä, P., and Pal- lic Infrastructure?” https://medium.com/iipp-blog/what Practice: A Study of Remotely Managed Localised Hu- oniemi, S. 2013. “What Is Agency? Conceptualizing -is-digital-public-infrastructure-6fbfa74f2f8c. manitarian Action in Syria.” Journal of Peacebuilding & Professional Agency at Work.” Educational Research Development 15(2): 235–249. Review 10: 45–65. Eaves, D., Mazzucato, M., and Vasconcellos, B. 2024. “Digital Public Infrastructure and Public Value: Ellis, E. C. 2024. “The Anthropocene Condition: Evolv- Ethayarajh, K., and Jurafsky, D. 2020. “Utility Is in the What Is ‘Public’about DPI?” ing through Social–Ecological Transformations.” Philo- Eye of the User: A Critique of NLP Leaderboards.” arXiv sophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 379(1893): preprint arXiv:2009.13888. Economist Intelligence Unit. 2021. “Measuring the 20220255. Prevalence of Online Violence against Women.” ETO (Emerging Technology Observatory). 2023. Ellis, R. P., Martins, B., and Zhu, W. 2017. “Health “Singapore’s AI Research Collaboration with China ECPAT (End Child Prostitution and Trafficking) and Care Demand Elasticities by Type of Service.” Journal More Than Doubled between 2016 and 2021.” INTERPOL (International Criminal Police Organiza- of Health Economics 55: 232–243. tion). 2018. “Towards a Global Indicator on Uniden- ETO (Emerging Technology Observatory). 2024. tified Victms in Child Sexual Exploitation Material.” Eloundou, T., Manning, S., Mishkin, P., and Rock, D. “The State of Global AI Research.” Emerging Technol- https://ecpat.org/resource/technical-report-towards 2024. “GPTs Are GPTs: Labor Market Impact Potential ogy Observatory. -a-global-indicator-on-unidentified-victims-in-child of LLMs.” Science 384(6702): 1306–1308. -sexual-exploitation-material/. Accessed 1 November Eurofound. 2025. “Digitisation in the Workplace.” Pub- 2024. Emmer De Albuquerque Green, C. 2024. “Defining lications Office of the European Union. https://www Responsible Use of AI Chatbots in Social Care for Old- .eurofound.europa.eu/en/publications/2021/digitisation Edenberg, E., and Wood, A. 2023. “Disambiguating er Adults.” Nature Aging 4(6): 745–747. -workplace. Accessed 28 February 2025. Algorithmic Bias: From Neutrality to Justice.” Proceed- ings of the 2023 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, Ennaji, O., Vergütz, L., and El Allali, A. 2023. “Ma- European Commission. 2019. “High-Level Expert and Society, 691–704. chine Learning in Nutrient Management: A Review.” Group on Artificial Intelligence: Ethics Guidelines for Artificial Intelligence in Agriculture 9: 1–11. Trustworthy AI.” https://op.europa.eu/en/publication Editorial Board. 2025. The New Arms Race. -detail/-/publication/d3988569-0434-11ea-8c1f Epoch AI. 2024a. “Computing Capacity.” https://epoch -01aa75ed71a1. Accessed 23 May 2024. Editorial. 2024. “Seeking Clarity Rather Than Strong .ai/data-insights/computing-capacity. Opinions on Intelligence.” Nature Machine Intelligence European Commission. 2025. “EU Launches Investai 6(12): 1408–1408. Epoch AI. 2024b. “Leading AI Companies Have Hun- Initiative to Mobilise €200 Billion of Investment in Ar- dreds of Thousands of Cutting-Edge AI Chips.” tificial Intelligence.” European Commission Press Re- Eger, S., Cao, Y., D’Souza, J., Geiger, A., Greisinger, lease, 10 February. C., Gross, S., Hou, Y., and others. 2025. “Transform- Epoch AI. 2024c. “Machine Learning Trends.” https:// ing Science with Large Language Models: A Survey on epoch.ai/trends. European Parliament. 2023a. “Artificial Intelligence AI-Assisted Scientific Discovery, Experimentation, Con- Act: Deal on Comprehensive Rules for Trustworthy AI.” tent Generation, and Evaluation.” arXiv preprint arXiv: Epoch AI. 2024d. “Most Large-Scale Models Are https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-room 2502.05151. Developed by US Companies.” https://epoch.ai/data /20231206IPR15699/artificial-intelligence-act-deal-on -insights/large-scale-models-by-country. -comprehensive-rules-for-trustworthy-ai. Accessed 11 Eggertsen, T. G., Travers, J. G., Hardy, E. J., Wolf, December 2023. M. J., McKinsey, T. A., and Saucerman, J. J. 2025. Epstein, Z., Hertzmann, A., Akten, M., Farid, H., Fjeld, “Logic-Based Machine Learning Predicts How Escita- J., Frank, M. R., Groh, M., and others. 2023. “Art and European Parliament. 2023b. “The Digital Services lopram Attenuates Cardiomyocyte Hypertrophy.” Pro- the Science of Generative AI.” Science 380(6650): Act Package.” https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 122(10): 1110–1111. /policies/digital-services-act-package. Accessed 11 De- e2420499122. cember 2023. Eriksson, M., Purificato, E., Noroozian, A., Vinagre, Eini, M., Kaboli, H. S., Rashidian, M., and Hedayat, H. J., Chaslot, G., Gomez, E., and Fernandez-Llorca, D. European Parliament. 2023c. “Generative AI and Wa- 2020. “Hazard and Vulnerability in Urban Flood Risk 2025. “Can We Trust AI Benchmarks? An Interdisciplin- termarking.” https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData Mapping: Machine Learning Techniques and Consider- ary Review of Current Issues in AI Evaluation.” arXiv /etudes/BRIE/2023/757583/EPRS_BRI(2023)757583 ing the Role of Urban Districts.” International Journal of preprint arXiv:2502.06559. _EN.pdf. Accessed 2 April 2025. Disaster Risk Reduction 50: 101687. Ernst, E., Merola, R., and Samaan, D. 2019. “Econom- Faber, J. M., Luyten, H., and Visscher, A. J. 2017. “The Eirich, R., McArthur, B. A., Anhorn, C., McGuinness, ics of Artificial Intelligence: Implications for the Future Effects of a Digital Formative Assessment Tool on Math- C., Christakis, D. A., and Madigan, S. 2022. “Associa- of Work.” IZA Journal of Labor Policy 9(1). ematics Achievement and Student Motivation: Results tion of Screen Time with Internalizing and Externalizing of a Randomized Experiment.” Computers & Education Behavior Problems in Children 12 Years or Younger: A Ertmer, P. A., and Ottenbreit-Leftwich, A. T. 2010. 106: 83–96. Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” JAMA Psychia- “Teacher Technology Change: How Knowledge, Con- try 79(5): 393–405. fidence, Beliefs, and Culture Intersect.” Journal of Re- Fabregas, R., Kremer, M., Lowes, M., On, R., and search on Technology in Education 42(3): 255–284. Zane, G. 2025. “Digital Information Provision and Be- Eisenmann, T. F., Karjus, A., Sola, M. C., Brinkmann, havior Change: Lessons from Six Experiments in East L., Supriyatno, B. I., and Rahwan, I. 2025. “Expertise Erumban, A. A., and de Vries, G. J. 2024. “Structural Africa.” American Economic Journal: Applied Econom- Elevates AI Usage: Experimental Evidence Compar- Change and Poverty Reduction in Developing Econo- ics 17(1): 527–566. ing Laypeople and Professional Artists.” arXiv preprint mies.” World Development 181: 106674. arXiv:2501.12374. Facchinetti, G., Petrucci, G., Albanesi, B., De Mari- Escobar, O., and Elstub, S. 2017. “Forms of Mini-Pub- nis, M. G., and Piredda, M. 2023. “Can Smart Home Eisfeldt, A. L., and Schubert, G. 2024. “AI and Fi- lics.” New Democracy. Technologies Help Older Adults Manage Their Chronic nance.” Working Paper 33076, National Bureau of Eco- Condition? A Systematic Literature Review.” Interna- nomic Research, Cambridge, MA. Esmaeilzadeh, P. 2024. “Challenges and Strategies tional Journal of Environmental Research and Public for Wide-Scale Artificial Intelligence (AI) Deployment in Health 20(2): 1205. Eisfeldt, A. L., Schubert, G., and Zhang, M. B. 2023. Healthcare Practices: A Perspective for Healthcare Orga- “Generative AI and Firm Values.” Working Paper 31222, nizations.” Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 151: 102861. Faelens, L., Hoorelbeke, K., Cambier, R., Van Put, J., National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Van de Putte, E., De Raedt, R., and Koster, E. H. 2021. Esteva, A., Kuprel, B., Novoa, R. A., Ko, J., Swetter, S. “The Relationship between Instagram Use and Indica- Eisfeldt, A. L., Schubert, G., Zhang, M. B., and Taska, M., Blau, H. M., and Thrun, S. 2017. “Dermatologist- tors of Mental Health: A Systematic Review.” Comput- B. 2024. “The Labor Impact of Generative AI on Firm Level Classification of Skin Cancer with Deep Neural ers in Human Behavior Reports 4: 100121. Values.” Available at SSRN 4436627. Networks.” Nature 542(7639): 115–118. 232 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Fallis, D. 2021. “The Epistemic Threat of Deepfakes.” Ferguson, C., Hickman, L. D., Turkmani, S., Breen, P., /CUI2019%2b-%2bchatbots%2bfor%2bcustomer %2b Philosophy & Technology 34(4): 623–643. Gargiulo, G., and Inglis, S. C. 2021. “‘Wearables Only service%2b-%2bauthors%2bversion.pdf ?sequence=1. Work on Patients That Wear Them:’ Barriers and Facili- Accessed 2 February 2024. Fan, J., Wang, S., Li, H., Yan, Z., Zhang, Y., Zheng, X., tators to the Adoption of Wearable Cardiac Monitoring and Wang, P. 2020. “Modeling the Ecological Status Technologies.” Cardiovascular Digital Health Journal Fontana, N., Pierri, F., and Aiello, L. M. 2024. “Nicer Response of Rivers to Multiple Stressors Using Ma- 2(2): 137–147. Than Humans: How Do Large Language Models Be- chine Learning: A Comparison of Environmental DNA have in the Prisoner’s Dilemma?” arXiv preprint arXiv: Metabarcoding and Morphological Data.” Water Re- Ferrario, A., and Loi, M. H ow Explainability Contrib- 2406.13605. search 183: 116004. utes to Trust in AI. Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Con- ference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, Foster, V., Gorgulu, N., Straub, S., and Vagliasindi, M. Fan, T., Peters, M., and Zilibotti, F. 2023. “Growing 2022. 1457–1466. 2023. “The Impact of Infrastructure on Development Like India—the Unequal Effects of Service-Led Growth.” Outcomes.” Policy Research Working Paper 10343, Econometrica 91(4): 1457–1494. Festerling, J., and Siraj, I. 2020. “Alexa, What Are World Bank, Washington, DC. You? Exploring Primary School Children’s Ontological Fan, Y., Tang, L., Le, H., Shen, K., Tan, S., Zhao, Y., Perceptions of Digital Voice Assistants in Open Interac- Frank, D.-A., Elbæk, C. T., Børsting, C. K., Mitkidis, Shen, Y., Li, X., and Gašević, D. 2025. “Beware of tions.” Human Development 64(1): 26–43. P., Otterbring, T., and Borau, S. 2021. “Drivers and Metacognitive Laziness: Effects of Generative Artificial Social Implications of Artificial Intelligence Adoption in Intelligence on Learning Motivation, Processes, and Fetterolf, E., Elder, A., Levi, M., and Trivedi, R. B. Healthcare During the Covid-19 Pandemic.” PLOS ONE Performance.” British Journal of Educational Technol- 2025. “Technology & the Dynamics of Care for Older 16(11): e0259928. ogy 56(2): 489–530. People.” Dædalus 154(1): 117–133. Frank, M. C. 2023. “Baby Steps in Evaluating the Ca- Farahani, M., and Ghasemi, G. 2024. “Artificial Intel- Feuerriegel, S., Maarouf, A., Bär, D., Geissler, D., pacities of Large Language Models.” Nature Reviews ligence and Inequality: Challenges and Opportunities.” Schweisthal, J., Pröllochs, N., Robertson, C. E., and Psychology 2(8): 451–452. Int. J. Innov. Educ 9: 78–99. others. 2025. “Using Natural Language Processing to Analyse Text Data in Behavioural Science.” Nature Re- Fraser, N. 2016. “Contradictions of Capital and Care.” Farrell, H., Gopnik, A., Shalizi, C., and Evans, J. 2025. views Psychology. New Left Review 100 (July). “Large AI Models Are Cultural and Social Technolo- gies.” Science 387(6739): 1153–1156. Filippas, A., Horton, J. J., and Manning, B. S. Large Frey, C. B., and Osborne, M. A. 2017. “The Future of Language Models as Simulated Economic Agents: Employment: How Susceptible Are Jobs to Computeri- Fast, L., and Bennett, C. 2020. “From the Ground Up: What Can We Learn from Homo Silicus? Proceedings sation?” Technological Forecasting and Social Change It’s About Time for Local Humanitarian Action.” HPG of the 25th ACM Conference on Economics and Com- 114: 254–280. Report, ODI. https://odi.org/documents/6169/From_the putation, 2024. 614–615. _ground_up_its_about_time_for_local_humanitarian Fried, S., and Lagakos, D. 2023. “Electricity and Firm _action.pdf. Filippucci, F., Gal, P., and Schief, M. 2024. “Miracle Productivity: A General-Equilibrium Approach.” Ameri- or Myth? Assessing the Macroeconomic Productivity can Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 15(4): 67–103. Feigenbaum, J., and Gross, D. P. 2024. “Answering Gains from Artificial Intelligence.” OECD Artificial Intel- the Call of Automation: How the Labor Market Adjusted ligence Papers 29, OECD Publishing, Paris. Frost, L., Khan, S., and Vinck, P. 2022. “Technologies to Mechanizing Telephone Operation.” The Quarterly in Humanitarian Settings: Digital Upskilling of Humani- Journal of Economics 139(3): 1879–1939. Filippucci, F., Gal, P., Jona Lasinio, C. S., Leandro, A., tarian Actors.” Harvard Humanitarian Initiative, Cam- and Nicoletti, G. 2024. “The Impact of Artificial Intelli- bridge, MA. Fejerskov, A. M., Clausen, M. L., and Seddig, S. 2024. gence on Productivity, Distribution and Growth.” OECD “Humanitarian Ignorance: Towards a New Paradigm of Artificial Intelligence Papers 15, OECD Publishing, Paris. Fry, D. 2024. “We Found over 300 Million Young Non-Knowledge in Digital Humanitarianism.” Disasters People Had Experienced Online Sexual Abuse and Ex- 48(2): e12609. Fingerman, K. L., Birditt, K. S., and Umberson, D. ploitation over the Course of Our Meta-Study.” https:// J. 2020. “Use of Technologies for Social Connected- theconversation.com/we-found-over-300-million Felber, N. A., Tian, Y. J., Pageau, F., Elger, B. S., and ness and Well-Being and as a Tool for Research Data -young-people-had-experienced-online-sexual-abuse Wangmo, T. 2023. “Mapping Ethical Issues in the Use Collection in Older Adults.” Mobile Technology for -and-exploitation-over-the-course-of-our-meta-study of Smart Home Health Technologies to Care for Older Adaptive Aging: Proceedings of a Workshop. National -229039. Accessed 20 September 2024. Persons: A Systematic Review.” BMC Medical Ethics Academies Press. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books 24(1): 24. /NBK563112/. Accessed 26 June 2024. Fu, Y., Bin, H., Zhou, T., Wang, M., Chen, Y., Lai, Z. G. D. C., Wobbrock, J. O., and Hiniker, A. 2024. “Creativ- Feldman, M. W., and Cavalli-Sforzatt, L. L. 1984. Fjelland, R. 2020. “Why General Artificial Intelligence ity in the Age of AI: Evaluating the Impact of Generative “Cultural and Biological Evolutionary Processes: Gene- Will Not Be Realized.” Humanities and Social Sciences AI on Design Outputs and Designers’ Creative Think- Culture Disequilibrium.” Proceedings of the National Communications 7(1): 10. ing.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00168. Academy of Sciences 81(5): 1604-1607. Fleck, A. 2024. “Which Countries Have the Most Data Fügener, A., Grahl, J., Gupta, A., and Ketter, W. 2021. Felin, T., and Holweg, M. 2024. “Theory Is All You Centers?” https://www.statista.com/chart/24149/data “Will Humans-in-the-Loop Become Borgs? Merits and Need: AI, Human Cognition, and Causal Reasoning.” -centers-per-country/. Pitfalls of Working with AI.” Management Information Strategy Science 9(4): 346–371. Systems Quarterly (MISQ)-Vol 45. Floridi, L. 2024. “Hypersuasion–on AI’s Persua- Felix, E., Silva, V., Caetano, M., Ribeiro, M. V., Fidal- sive Power and How to Deal with It.” Philosophy & Fukuyama, F., Richman, B., Goel, A., Schaake, M., go, T. M., Rosa Neto, F., Sanchez, Z. M., and others. Technology. Katz, R., and Melamed, D. 2020. “Report of the Work- 2020. “Excessive Screen Media Use in Preschoolers Is ing Group on Platform Scale.” Accessed 12 June 2022. Associated with Poor Motor Skills.” Cyberpsychology, Fluharty, M. E., Bone, J. K., Bu, F., Sonke, J. K., Fan- Behavior, and Social Networking 23(6): 418–425. court, D., and Paul, E. 2023. “Associations between Fulay, S., Brannon, W., Mohanty, S., Overney, C., Extracurricular Arts Activities, School-Based Arts En- Poole-Dayan, E., Roy, D., and Kabbara, J. 2024. “On Feng, G., Yang, K., Gu, Y., Ai, X., Luo, S., Sun, J., He, gagement, and Subsequent Externalising Behaviours the Relationship between Truth and Political Bias in D., Li, Z., and Wang, L. 2024. “How Numerical Pre- in the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study.” Scientific Language Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.05283. cision Affects Mathematical Reasoning Capabilities of Reports 13(1): 13840. LLMs.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13857. Fumagalli, E., Shrum, L., and Lowrey, T. M. 2024. Følstad, A., and Skjuve, M. 2019. “Chatbots for “The Effects of Social Media Consumption on Adoles- Ferdousi, R., Hossain, M. A., and El Saddik, A. 2021. Customer Service: User Experience and Motivation.” cent Psychological Well-Being.” Journal of the Associa- “Early-Stage Risk Prediction of Non-Communicable Proceedings of the 1st international conference on tion for Consumer Research 9(2): 119–130. Disease Using Machine Learning in Health CPS.” IEEE conversational user interfaces. https://sintef.brage Access 9: 96823–96837. .unit.no/sintef-xmlui/bitstream/handle/11250/2633078 REFERENCES 233 Gadiraju, V., Kane, S., Dev, S., Taylor, A., Wang, D., Gao, J., Yin, Y., Myers, K. R., Lakhani, K. R., and the G7 AI Hiroshima Policy Framework.” Global Leaders Denton, E., and Brewer, R. 2023. “‘I Wouldn’t Say Wang, D. 2021. “Potentially Long-Lasting Effects of the in Unity and Evolvement (GLUE). Offensive But...:’ Disability-Centered Perspectives on Pandemic on Scientists.” Nature Communications 12(1): Large Language Models.” Proceedings of the 2023 1–6. Gezici, G. 2022. “Case Study: The Impact of Location on ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Bias in Search Results.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206 .11869. Transparency, 205–216. Gao, S., Fang, A., Huang, Y., Giunchiglia, V., Noori, A., Schwarz, J. R., Ektefaie, Y., Kondic, J., and Zitnik, Gharahighehi, A., Van Schoors, R., Topali, P., and Gadotti, A., Rocher, L., Houssiau, F., Creţu, A.-M., and M. 2024. “Empowering Biomedical Discovery with AI Ooge, J. 2024. “Supporting Personalized Lifelong de Montjoye, Y.-A. 2024. “Anonymization: The Imper- Agents.” Cell 187(22): 6125–6151. Learning with Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence fect Science of Using Data While Preserving Privacy.” Systems.” Science Advances 10(29): eadn7053. Gao, Y., and Research, G. C. 2024. Quantifying Github Copilot’s Impact in the Enterprise with Accenture. Ghobadpour, A., Boulon, L., Mousazadeh, H., Malva- Gaessler, F., and Piezunka, H. 2023. “Training with AI: GitHub blog [Online]. https://github.blog/news-insights jerdi, A. S., and Rafiee, S. 2019. “State of the Art of Au- Evidence from Chess Computers.” Strategic Manage- /research/research-quantifying-github-copilots-impact tonomous Agricultural Off-Road Vehicles Driven by Re- ment Journal 44(11): 2724–2750. -in-the-enterprise-with-accenture/. newable Energy Systems.” Energy Procedia 162: 4–13. Gagné, M., and Bhave, D. 2010. “Autonomy in the Garassino, M. C., Odunsi, K., Siniscalchi, M., and Ghobadpour, A., Monsalve, G., Cardenas, A., and Workplace: An Essential Ingredient to Employee En- Veronesi, P. 2025. “On the Economic Infeasibility of Mousazadeh, H. 2022. “Off-Road Electric Vehicles gagement and Well-Being in Every Culture.” Human Personalized Medicine, and a Solution.” Working Paper and Autonomous Robots in Agricultural Sector: Autonomy in Cross-Cultural Context: Perspectives on 33539, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam- Trends, Challenges, and Opportunities.” Vehicles 4(3): the Psychology of Agency, Freedom, and Well-Being. bridge, MA. 843–864. Springer. Gardner, C., and Henry, P. B. 2023. “The Global Infra- Ghorkhmazyan, M. 2022. “Mercy Corps’ Guide to Galaz, V. 2024. Dark Machines: How Artificial Intelli- structure Gap: Potential, Perils, and a Framework for Dis- Building a Digital Ecosystem for M&E at Scale.” Neth- gence, Digitalization and Automation Is Changing Our tinction.” Journal of Economic Literature 61(4): 1318–1358. ope. https://nethope.org/articles/mercy-corps-guide-to Living Planet. Taylor & Francis. -building-a-digital-ecosystem-for-me-at-scale/. Gardner, J., Durand, S., Stoller, D., and Bittner, R. Galaz, V., Metzler, H., Schill, C., Lindahl, T., Daume, M. 2023. “LLark: A Multimodal Instruction-Following Ghosh, K., and Sadeghian, S. 2024. “The Impact of S., Marklund, A., Castro, A. J., and others. 2025. “Ar- Language Model for Music.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310 AI on Perceived Job Decency and Meaningfulness: A tificial Intelligence, Digital Social Networks, and Climate .07160. Case Study.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.14273. Emotions.” NPJ Climate Action 4(1): 23. Garikapati, D., and Shetiya, S. S. 2024. “Autonomous Ghosh, S., and Caliskan, A. 2023. “ChatGPT Perpetu- Gallego, A., and Kurer, T. 2022. “Automation, Digi- Vehicles: Evolution of Artificial Intelligence and the ates Gender Bias in Machine Translation and Ignores talization, and Artificial Intelligence in the Workplace: Current Industry Landscape.” Big Data and Cognitive Non-Gendered Pronouns: Findings across Bengali and Implications for Political Behavior.” Annual Review of Computing 8(4): 42. Five Other Low-Resource Languages.” Proceedings of Political Science 25: 463–484. the 2023 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, and So- Gaskins, N. 2023. “Interrogating Algorithmic Bias: ciety, 901–912. Gallegos, I. O., Rossi, R. A., Barrow, J., Tanjim, M. From Speculative Fiction to Liberatory Design.” Tech- M., Kim, S., Dernoncourt, F., Yu, T., Zhang, R., and Trends 67(3): 417–425. Giacosa, E., Alam, G. M., Culasso, F., and Crocco, E. Ahmed, N. K. 2024. “Bias and Fairness in Large Lan- 2023. “Stress-Inducing or Performance-Enhancing? guage Models: A Survey.” Computational Linguistics Gaspar, V. J., Jaramillo, L., Wingender, P., 2016. “Tax Safety Measure or Cause of Mistrust? The Paradox of 50(3): 1097–1179. Capacity and Growth: Is There a Tipping Point?” IMF Digital Surveillance in the Workplace.” Journal of Inno- Working Paper 16/234. vation & Knowledge 8(2): 100357. Gallup. 2024. “State of the Global Workplace.” https:// www.gallup.com/workplace/349484/state-of-the Gathmann, C., Grimm, F., and Winkler, E. 2025. “AI, Gichoya, J. W., Thomas, K., Celi, L. A., Safdar, N., Ba- -global-workplace.aspx. Accessed 28 February 2025. Task Changes in Jobs, and Worker Reallocation.” nerjee, I., Banja, J. D., Seyyed-Kalantari, L., Trivedi, H., and Purkayastha, S. 2023. “AI Pitfalls and What Galton, F. 1907. “Vox Populi.” Nature 1949(75): Ge, T., Chan, X., Wang, X., Yu, D., Mi, H., and Yu, Not to Do: Mitigating Bias in AI.” The British Journal of 450–451. D. 2024. “Scaling Synthetic Data Creation with Radiology 96(1150): 20230023. 1,000,000,000 Personas.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406 Gambacorta, L., and Shreeti, V. 2025. “The AI Sup- .20094. Gilardi, F., Alizadeh, M., and Kubli, M. 2023. “Chat- ply Chain.” Working Paper 154, Bank for International GPT Outperforms Crowd Workers for Text-Annotation Settlements. Geirhos, R., Jacobsen, J.-H., Michaelis, C., Zemel, R., Tasks.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- Brendel, W., Bethge, M., and Wichmann, F. A. 2020. ences 120(30): e2305016120. Gambacorta, L., Sabatini, F., and Schiaffi, S. 2025. “Shortcut Learning in Deep Neural Networks.” Nature “Artificial Intelligence and Relationship Lending.” Bank Machine Intelligence 2(11): 665–673. Gilbert, S., Kather, J. N., and Hogan, A. 2024. “Aug- of Italy, Economic Research and International Relations mented Non-Hallucinating Large Language Models as Area. Geiselmann, R., Tsourgianni, A., Deroy, O., and Har- Medical Information Curators.” NPJ Digital Medicine 7(1): ris, L. T. 2023. “Interacting with Agents without a Mind: 100. Ganguli, D., Askell, A., Schiefer, N., Liao, T. I., The Case for Artificial Agents.” Current Opinion in Be- Lukošiūtė, K., Chen, A., Goldie, A., and others. 2023. havioral Sciences 51: 101282. Gille, F., Jobin, A., and Ienca, M. 2020. “What We Talk “The Capacity for Moral Self-Correction in Large Lan- About When We Talk About Trust: Theory of Trust for AI guage Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.07459. Gentzkow, M., Shapiro, J. M., Yang, F., and Yuruko- in Healthcare.” Intelligence-Based Medicine 1: 100001. glu, A. 2024. “Pricing Power in Advertising Markets: Ganne, E., Locks, L., and Xu, A. 2024. Trading with Theory and Evidence.” American Economic Review Giray, L. 2023. “Prompt Engineering with ChatGPT: A Intelligence: How AI Shapes and Is Shaped by Inter- 114(2): 500–533. Guide for Academic Writers.” Annals of Biomedical En- national Trade. Geneva, Switzerland: World Trade gineering 51(12): 2629–2633. Organization. George, A. S., and Shaji, T. 2024. “Overcoming the Collective Action Problem: Enacting Norms to Address Girotra, K., Meincke, L., Terwiesch, C., and Ulrich, K. Gans, J. S. 2024a. “How Will Generative AI Impact Adolescent Technology Addiction.” Partners Universal T. 2023. “Ideas Are Dimes a Dozen: Large Language Communication?” Economics Letters 242: 111872. International Research Journal 3(2): 57–75. Models for Idea Generation in Innovation.” Available at SSRN 4526071. Gans, J. S. 2024b. “Market Power in Artificial Intelli- Gerundino, D., Hearn, C., McAllister, P. A., Romiti, S., gence.” Working Paper 32270, National Bureau of Eco- Saltini, A., Snower, D. J., and Twomey, P. D. 2024. “To- Glazko, K. S., Yamagami, M., Desai, A., Mack, K. nomic Research, Cambridge, MA. wards Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy AI: Implementing A., Potluri, V., Xu, X., and Mankoff, J. 2023. “An 234 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Autoethnographic Case Study of Generative Artificial Goldin, C., Kerr, S. P., and Olivetti, C. 2024. “The Gray, M. L., and Suri, S. 2019. Ghost Work: How to Intelligence’s Utility for Accessibility.” Proceedings of Other Side of the Mountain: Women’s Employment and Stop Silicon Valley from Building a New Global Under- the 25th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference Earnings over the Family Cycle.” Oxford Open Econom- class. Harper Business. on Computers and Accessibility, 1–8. ics 3(Supplement 1): i323–i334. Green, J. 2024. “Why Big Corporations Are Quietly Glickman, M., and Sharot, T. 2024a. “AI-Induced Hy- Goldin, I., Koutroumpis, P., Lafond, F., and Winkler, J. Abandoning Their Climate Commitments?” Forbes per-Learning in Humans.” Current Opinion in Psychol- 2024. “Why Is Productivity Slowing Down?” Journal of Digital Assets, 29 August. ogy 60: 101900. Economic Literature 62(1): 196–268. Green, M., and Lawson, V. 2011. “Recentring Care: Glickman, M., and Sharot, T. 2024b. “How Human–AI Goldman Sachs. 2024. “AI Is Poised to Drive 160% Interrogating the Commodification of Care.” Social & Feedback Loops Alter Human Perceptual, Emotional Increase in Data Center Power Demand.” https://www Cultural Geography 12(6): 639–654. and Social Judgements.” Nature Human Behaviour. .goldmansachs.com/insights/articles/AI-poised-to-drive -160-increase-in-power-demand. Green, S. E., Rees, J. P., Stephens, P. A., Hill, R. A., Globig, L. K., Xu, R., Rathje, S., and Van Bavel, J. J. and Giordano, A. J. 2020. “Innovations in Camera 2024. “Perceived (Mis)alignment in Generative Artifi- Goldstone, J. A. 2002. “Efflorescences and Economic Trapping Technology and Approaches: The Integration cial Intelligence Varies across Cultures.” https://osf.io Growth in World History: Rethinking the “Rise of the of Citizen Science and Artificial Intelligence.” Animals /preprints/psyarxiv/suqa2_v1. Accessed 28 April 2025. West” and the Industrial Revolution.” Journal of World 10(1): 132. History 13(2): 323–389. Glüer, K., and Wikforss, Å. 2022. “What Is Knowledge Greenblatt, R., Denison, C., Wright, B., Roger, F., Resistance?” Knowledge Resistance in High-Choice In- Gollin, D., and and Kaboski, J. P. 2023. “New Views MacDiarmid, M., Marks, S., Treutlein, J., and others. formation Environments. Routledge. of Structural Transformation: Insights from Recent Lit- 2024. “Alignment Faking in Large Language Models.” erature.” Oxford Development Studies 51(4): 339–361. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14093. Glüer-Pagin, K., and Spectre, L. 2024. “Where Is the Motivation in Motivated Numeracy?” Review of Philoso- Gonzalez, A., and Matias, J. N. 2025. “Measuring the Greenwald, A. G., and Banaji, M. R. 1995. “Implicit phy and Psychology: 1–18. Mental Health of Content Reviewers, a Systematic Re- Social Cognition: Attitudes, Self-Esteem, and Stereo- view.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00244. types.” Psychological Review 102(1): 4. Gmyrek, P., Berg, J., and Bescond, D. 2023. “Genera- tive AI and Jobs: A Global Analysis of Potential Effects González-Bailón, S., Lazer, D., Barberá, P., Zhang, Grepperud, S., and Rasmussen, I. 2004. “A General on Job Quantity and Quality.” Working Paper 96, Inter- M., Allcott, H., Brown, T., Crespo-Tenorio, A., and Equilibrium Assessment of Rebound Effects.” Energy national Labour Organization, Geneva. others. 2023. “Asymmetric Ideological Segregation Economics 26(2): 261–282. in Exposure to Political News on Facebook.” Science Gmyrek, P., Winkler, H., and Garganta, S. 2024. “Buf- 381(6656): 392–398. Griffin, A. 2024. “ChatGPT Creators OpenAI Are Gen- fer or Bottleneck? Employment Exposure to Generative erating 100 Billion Words Per Day, CEO Says.” The In- AI and the Digital Divide in Latin America.” Policy Re- Goodin, R. E., and Spiekermann, K. 2018. An Epis- dependent, 12 February. https://www.the-independent search Working Paper 10863, World Bank, Washington, temic Theory of Democracy. Oxford University Press. .com/tech/chatgpt-openai-words-sam-altman DC. -b2494900.html. Google Research. 2025. “Green Light: Reduce Traf- Goel, M., and Pandey, M. 2024. “Crop Yield Prediction fic Emissions with AI—Google Research.” https://sites Grinschgl, S., and Neubauer, A. C. 2022. “Supporting Using AI: A Review.” 2nd International Conference on .research.google/gr/greenlight/. Cognition with Modern Technology: Distributed Cogni- Disruptive Technologies (ICDT), 1547–1553. tion Today and in an AI-Enhanced Future.” Frontiers in Gordon, E. C., and Seth, A. K. 2024. “Ethical Con- Artificial Intelligence 5: 908261. Goertzel, B. 2014. “Artificial General Intelligence: Con- siderations for the Use of Brain–Computer Interfaces cept, State of the Art, and Future Prospects.” Journal of for Cognitive Enhancement.” PLOS Biology 22(10): Griot, M., Hemptinne, C., Vanderdonckt, J., and Yuk- Artificial General Intelligence 5(1): 1. e3002899. sel, D. 2025. “Large Language Models Lack Essential Metacognition for Reliable Medical Reasoning.” Nature Goethals, S., and Rhue, L. 2024. “One World, One Gordon, R. 2017. The Rise and Fall of American Communications 16(1): 642. Opinion? The Superstar Effect in LLM Responses.” Growth: The US Standard of Living since the Civil War. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10281. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Grossmann, I., Varnum, M. E. W., Hutcherson, C. A., and Mandel, D. R. 2024. “When Expert Predictions Goggin, G., Ellis, K., and Hawkins, W. 2019. “Disabil- Gorwa, R., Binns, R., and Katzenbach, C. 2020. “Al- Fail.” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 28(2): 113–123. ity at the Centre of Digital Inclusion: Assessing a New gorithmic Content Moderation: Technical and Political Moment in Technology and Rights.” Communication Challenges in the Automation of Platform Governance.” Grzegorczyk, M. 2023. “How AI Is Leading the Fight Research and Practice 5(3): 290–303. Big Data & Society 7(1): 2053951719897945. against Online Child Abuse.” https://emerging-europe .com/analysis/how-ai-is-leading-the-fight-against Goggin, G., Prahl, A., and Zhuang, K. V. 2023. “Com- Gou, H., and Perceval, G. 2023. “Does Digital Media -online-child-abuse/. Accessed 27 September 2024. municating AI and Disability.” The Palgrave Handbook Use Increase Risk of Social-Emotional Delay for Chi- of Disability and Communication. Springer. nese Preschoolers?” Journal of Children and Media Gu, C., Peng, Y., Nastase, S. A., Mayer, R. E., and Li, 17(1): 1–16. P. 2024. “Onscreen Presence of Instructors in Video Goh, E., Gallo, R., Hom, J., Strong, E., Weng, Y., Ker- Lectures Affects Learners’ Neural Synchrony and Vi- man, H., Cool, J. A., and others. 2024. “Large Lan- Gould, R. K., Jimenez Naranjo, Y., and Balvanera, P. sual Attention During Multimedia Learning.” Proceed- guage Model Influence on Diagnostic Reasoning: A 2025. “Relationality Is Not Weird: The Importance of ings of the National Academy of Sciences 121(12): Randomized Clinical Trial.” JAMA Network Open 7(10): Relational Thinking in the Majority of the Planet’s Soci- e2309054121. e2440969–e2440969. eties.” Ecosystems and People 21(1): 2427810. Gu, X., and Krenn, M. 2024. “Interesting Scientific Goldberg, P. K., and Reed, T. 2023. “Presidential Ad- Government of Mexico. 2020. “Outcome Document Idea Generation Using Knowledge Graphs and LLMs: dress: Demand-Side Constraints in Development. The of the High-Level Event ‘Making a Decade of Action for Evaluations with 100 Research Group Leaders.” arXiv Role of Market Size, Trade, and (in)Equality.” Economet- Indigenous Languages’ on the Occasion of the Closing preprint arXiv:2405.17044. rica 91(6): 1915–1950. of the 2019 International Year of Indigenous Languag- es.” Mexico City: Government of Mexico. Guerreiro, N. M., Alves, D. M., Waldendorf, J., Had- Goldfarb, A., and Que, V. F. 2023. “The Economics dow, B., Birch, A., Colombo, P., and Martins, A. F. T. of Digital Privacy.” Annual Review of Economics 15: Granulo, A., Fuchs, C., and Puntoni, S. 2021. “Prefer- 2023. “Hallucinations in Large Multilingual Translation 267–286. ence for Human (Vs. Robotic) Labor Is Stronger in Sym- Models.” Transactions of the Association for Computa- bolic Consumption Contexts.” Journal of Consumer tional Linguistics 11: 1500–1517. Psychology 31(1): 72–80. REFERENCES 235 Guess, A. M., Malhotra, N., Pan, J., Barberá, P., All- and Implications for World Development.” Journal of Systematic Review on Large Language Models (LLMs).” cott, H., Brown, T., Crespo-Tenorio, A., and others. Development Economics 166: 103205. NPJ Digital Medicine 7(1): 183. 2023a. “How Do Social Media Feed Algorithms Affect Attitudes and Behavior in an Election Campaign?” Sci- Gust, S., Hanushek, E. A., and Woessmann, L. A. Ham, J., Quistorff, B., and Weinberg, B. A. 2025. ence 381(6656): 398–404. 2024b. “World Unprepared: Missing Skills for Develop- “Recombinant Innovation, Novel Ideas, and the Start of ment.” EconPol Forum 25(2): 43–46. Nobel Prize-Winning Work.” Working Paper 33579, Na- Guess, A. M., Malhotra, N., Pan, J., Barberá, P., All- tional Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. cott, H., Brown, T., Crespo-Tenorio, A., and others. Gustafson, E. 2024. “Probing the Limits of Figures and 2023b. “Reshares on Social Media Amplify Political Grounds: Artificial Intelligence and Quantum Computa- Hampole, M., Papanikolaou, D., Schmidt, L. D., and News but Do Not Detectably Affect Beliefs or Opin- tion.” New Explorations 4(1). Seegmiller, B. 2025. “Artificial Intelligence and the La- ions.” Science 381(6656): 404–408. bor Market.” Working Paper 33509, National Bureau of Gyevnar, B., and Kasirzadeh, A. 2025. “AI Safety for Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Guetto, R., Bazzani, G., and Vignoli, D. 2022. “Nar- Everyone.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09288. ratives of the Future and Fertility Decision-Making in Hampstead, J. P. 2024. “Why AI Requires So Much Uncertain Times. An Application to the Covid-19 Pan- Haase, J., and Pokutta, S. 2024. “Human-AI Co-Cre- Compute.” https://www.freightwaves.com/news/why-ai demic.” Vienna Yearbook of Population Research 20: ativity: Exploring Synergies across Levels of Creative -requires-so-much-compute. 223–260. Collaboration.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.12527. Hamrani, A., Akbarzadeh, A., and Madramootoo, Guetto, R., Morabito, M. F., Vollbracht, M., and Vi- Haber, A., and Corriveau, K. H. 2023. “Social Robots C. A. 2020. “Machine Learning for Predicting Green- gnoli, D. 2023. “Fertility and Media Narratives of the as Social Learning Partners: Exploring Children’s Early house Gas Emissions from Agricultural Soils.” Science Economy: Evidence from Italian News Coverage.” De- Understanding and Learning from Social Robots.” Be- of The Total Environment 741: 140338. mography 60(2): 607–630. havioral and Brain Sciences 46: e36. Han, R., Acosta, J. N., Shakeri, Z., Ioannidis, J. P., Guilbeault, D., Becker, J., and Centola, D. 2018. “So- Habermas, J. 1984. The Theory of Communicative Ac- Topol, E. J., and Rajpurkar, P. 2024. “Randomised cial Learning and Partisan Bias in the Interpretation of tion: Volume 1. Boston, MA: Beacon Press. Controlled Trials Evaluating Artificial Intelligence in Climate Trends.” Proceedings of the National Academy Clinical Practice: A Scoping Review.” The Lancet Digital of Sciences of the United States of America 115(39): Hackenburg, K., and Margetts, H. 2024a. “Evaluating Health 6(5): e367–e373. 9714–9719. the Persuasive Influence of Political Microtargeting with Large Language Models.” Proceedings of the National Han, T. A., Pereira, L. M., Santos, F. C., and Lenaerts, Gulshan, V., Peng, L., Coram, M., Stumpe, M. C., Wu, Academy of Sciences 121(24): e2403116121. T. 2020. “To Regulate or Not: A Social Dynamics Analy- D., Narayanaswamy, A., Venugopalan, S., and others. sis of an Idealised AI Race.” Journal of Artificial Intel- 2016. “Development and Validation of a Deep Learning Hackenburg, K., and Margetts, H. 2024b. “Reply to ligence Research 69: 881–921. Algorithm for Detection of Diabetic Retinopathy in Reti- Teeny and Matz: Toward the Robust Measurement of nal Fundus Photographs.” JAMA 316(22): 2402–2410. Personalized Persuasion with Generative AI.” Proceed- Hanley, N., McGregor, P. G., Swales, J. K., and Turner, ings of the National Academy of Sciences 121(43): K. 2009. “Do Increases in Energy Efficiency Improve Gunasekeran, D. V., Tseng, R. M. W. W., Tham, Y. C., e2418817121. Environmental Quality and Sustainability?” Ecological and Wong, T. Y. 2021. “Applications of Digital Health Economics 68(3): 692–709. for Public Health Responses to Covid-19: A Systematic Hackenburg, K., Tappin, B. M., Röttger, P., Hale, S. A., Scoping Review of Artificial Intelligence, Telehealth and Bright, J., and Margetts, H. 2025. “Scaling Language Hannun, A. Y., Rajpurkar, P., Haghpanahi, M., Tison, Related Technologies.” NPJ Digital Medicine 2021 4:1 Model Size Yields Diminishing Returns for Single-Mes- G. H., Bourn, C., Turakhia, M. P., and Ng, A. Y. 2019. 4(1): 1–6. sage Political Persuasion.” Proceedings of the National “Cardiologist-Level Arrhythmia Detection and Classifi- Academy of Sciences 122(10): e2413443122. cation in Ambulatory Electrocardiograms Using a Deep Guo, D., Zhu, Q., Yang, D., Xie, Z., Dong, K., Zhang, Neural Network.” Nature Medicine 25(1): 65–69. W., Chen, G., and others. 2024. “Deepseek-Coder: Hagendorff, T. 2024. “Mapping the Ethics of Genera- When the Large Language Model Meets Program- tive AI: A Comprehensive Scoping Review.” Minds and Harari, Y. N. 2024. Nexus: A Brief History of Informa- ming—the Rise of Code Intelligence.” arXiv: 2401.14196. Machines 34(4): 39. tion Networks from the Stone Age to AI. New York: Random House. Guo, S., Xu, P., Miao, Q., Shao, G., Chapman, C. A., Hager, P., Jungmann, F., Holland, R., Bhagat, K., Hu- Chen, X., He, G., and others. 2020. “Automatic Identi- brecht, I., Knauer, M., Vielhauer, J., and others. 2024. Hartman, V., Zhang, X., Poddar, R., McCarty, M., fication of Individual Primates with Deep Learning Tech- “Evaluation and Mitigation of the Limitations of Large Fortenko, A., Sholle, E., Sharma, R., Campion, T., niques.” iScience 23(8): 101412. Language Models in Clinical Decision-Making.” Nature and Steel, P. A. 2024. “Developing and Evaluat- Medicine 30(9): 2613–2622. ing Large Language Model–Generated Emergency Guo, S., Zhang, B., Liu, T., Liu, T., Khalman, M., Llin- Medicine Handoff Notes.” JAMA Network Open 7(12): ares, F., Rame, A., and others. 2024. “Direct Lan- Hagos, D. H., Battle, R., and Rawat, D. B. 2024. “Re- e2448723–e2448723. guage Model Alignment from Online AI Feedback.” cent Advances in Generative AI and Large Language arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.04792. Models: Current Status, Challenges, and Perspec- Harvard Growth Lab. 2025. “Growth Projections and tives.” IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence 5(12): Complexity Rankings.” Harvard Dataverse. https://doi Gupta, A., and Treviranus, J. 2022. “Inclusively De- 5873–5893. .org/10.7910/DVN/XTAQMC. Accessed 1 April 2025. signed Artificial Intelligence.” Digital Innovation and the Future of Work. River Publishers. Haider, J., Söderström, K. R., Ekström, B., and Rödl, Haslberger, M., Gingrich, J., and Bhatia, J. 2024. “No M. 2024. “GPT-Fabricated Scientific Papers on Google Great Equalizer: Experimental Evidence on AI in the UK Gupta, P., Nguyen, T. N., Gonzalez, C., and Woolley, Scholar: Key Features, Spread, and Implications for Labor Market.” Available at SSRN 4594466. A. W. 2023. “Fostering Collective Intelligence in Hu- Preempting Evidence Manipulation.” Harvard Kennedy man–AI Collaboration: Laying the Groundwork for Co- School Misinformation Review 5(5): 1–16. Hassan, H., Islam, A., Siddique, A., and Wang, L. humain.” Topics in Cognitive Science. C. 2024. “Telementoring and Homeschooling Dur- Haidt, J. 2024. The Anxious Generation: How the ing School Closures: A Randomised Experiment in Gurven, M., Buoro, Y., Rodriguez, D. E., Sayre, K., Great Rewiring of Childhood Is Causing an Epidemic of Rural Bangladesh.” The Economic Journal 134(662): Trumble, B., Pyhälä, A., Kaplan, H., and others. 2024. Mental Illness. Random House. 2418–2438. “Subjective Well-Being across the Life Course among Non-Industrialized Populations.” Science Advances Haigh, T., Priestley, P. M., and Rope, C. 2016. ENIAC Hassija, V., Chamola, V., Mahapatra, A., Singal, A., 10(43): eado0952. in Action: Making and Remaking the Modern Comput- Goel, D., Huang, K., Scardapane, S., and others. er. MIT Press. 2024. “Interpreting Black-Box Models: A Review on Ex- Gust, S., Hanushek, E. A., and Woessmann, L. plainable Artificial Intelligence.” Cognitive Computation 2024a. “Global Universal Basic Skills: Current Deficits Haltaufderheide, J., and Ranisch, R. 2024. “The 16(1): 45–74. Ethics of ChatGPT in Medicine and Healthcare: A 236 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Hastie, R., and Kameda, T. 2005. “The Robust Beauty Hernström, V., Josefsson, V., Sartor, H., Schmidt, D., Hjort, J., and Poulsen, J. 2019. “The Arrival of Fast of Majority Rules in Group Decisions.” Psychological Larsson, A.-M., Hofvind, S., Andersson, I., and oth- Internet and Employment in Africa.” American Econom- Review 112(2): 494. ers. 2025. “Screening Performance and Characteris- ic Review 109(3): 1032–1079. tics of Breast Cancer Detected in the Mammography Hatherley, J. J. 2020. “Limits of Trust in Medical AI.” Screening with Artificial Intelligence Trial (Masai): A Ran- HLEG (High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Intel- Journal of Medical Ethics 46(7): 478–481. domised, Controlled, Parallel-Group, Non-Inferiority, ligence). 2019. “High-Level Expert Group on Artificial Single-Blinded, Screening Accuracy Study.” The Lancet Intelligence.” Ethics Guidelines for Trustworthy AI 6. Haupt, C. E., and Marks, M. 2023. “AI-Generated Digital Health 7(3): 175–183. Medical Advice—GPT and Beyond.” JAMA 329(16): Ho, A., Besiroglu, T., Erdil, E., Owen, D., Rahman, R., 1349–1350. Herrendorf, B., Rogerson, R., and Valentinyi, Á. Guo, Z. C., Atkinson, D., Thompson, N., and Sevilla, 2022. “New Evidence on Sectoral Labor Productivity: J. 2024. “Algorithmic Progress in Language Models.” Hausfather, Z. 2025. “An Assessment of Current Pol- Implications for Industrialization and Development.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05812. icy Scenarios over the 21st Century and the Reduced Working Paper 29834, National Bureau of Economic Plausibility of High-Emissions Pathways.” Dialogues on Research, Cambridge, MA. Ho, L., Barnhart, J., Trager, R., Bengio, Y., Brundage, Climate Change: 29768659241304854. M., Carnegie, A., Chowdhury, R., and others. 2023. Hertog, E., Fukuda, S., Matsukura, R., Nagase, N., “International Institutions for Advanced AI.” arXiv pre- Havaldar, S., Rai, S., Singhal, B., Liu, L., Guntuku, S. and Lehdonvirta, V. 2023. “The Future of Unpaid print arXiv:2307.04699. C., and Ungar, L. 2023. “Multilingual Language Models Work: Estimating the Effects of Automation on Time Are Not Multicultural: A Case Study in Emotion.” arXiv Spent on Housework and Care Work in Japan and the Ho, T. D. H., and Nguyen, S. T. T. 2024. “Self-Attentive preprint arXiv:2307.01370. UK.” Technological Forecasting and Social Change 191: Sequential Recommendation Models Enriched with 122443. More Features.” Proceedings of the 2024 8th Interna- Havers, B., Tripathi, K., Burton, A., McManus, S., and tional Conference on Deep Learning Technologies. As- Cooper, C. 2024. “Cybercrime Victimisation among Hertog, E., Ruppanner, L., and Churchill, B. 2024. sociation for Computing Machinery. Older Adults: A Probability Sample Survey in England “Silicon Caregivers: A Multilevel Analysis of European and Wales.” PloS one 19(12): e0314380. Perspectives on Robotic Technologies for Elderly Hobden, C. 2015. “Domestic Workers Organize–but Care.” Community, Work & Family 27(5): 698–718. Can They Bargain.” Mapping Collective Bargaining He, J., Feng, W., Min, Y., Yi, J., Tang, K., Li, S., Zhang, and Other Forms of Negotiation in the Domestic Work J., and others. 2023. “Control Risk for Potential Misuse Hewitt, J., Geirhos, R., and Kim, B. 2025. “We Can’t Sector. of Artificial Intelligence in Science.” arXiv preprint arXiv: Understand AI Using Our Existing Vocabulary.” arXiv 2312.06632. preprint arXiv:2502.07586. Hoes, E., Altay, S., and Bermeo, J. 2023. “Leveraging ChatGPT for Efficient Fact-Checking.” PsyArXiv. 3 April. He, Y.-H. 2024. “AI-Driven Research in Pure Mathemat- Hicks, M. T., Humphries, J., and Slater, J. 2024. ics and Theoretical Physics.” Nature Reviews Physics “ChatGPT Is Bullshit.” Ethics and Information Technol- Hoffman, R., and Beato, G. 2025. Superagency: What 6(9): 546–553. ogy 26(2): 1–10. Could Possibly Go Right with Our AI Future. New York, NY: Simon and Schuster. Hefner, D., Knop, K., Schmitt, S., and Vorderer, P. Higgins, M. C., Nguyen, M.-T., Kosowsky, T., Unan, L., 2019. “Rules? Role Model? Relationship? The Impact of Mete, M., Rowe, S., and Marchalik, D. 2021. “Burnout, Hoffmann, M. J. 2012. Ozone Depletion and Climate Parents on Their Children’s Problematic Mobile Phone Professional Fulfillment, Intention to Leave, and Sleep- Change: Constructing a Global Response. New York: Involvement.” Media Psychology 22(1): 82–108. Related Impairment among Faculty Radiologists in the State University of New York Press. United States: An Epidemiologic Study.” Journal of the Heim, A. B., Bharani, T., Konstantinides, N., Pow- American College of Radiology 18(9): 1359–1364. Hoffmann, M., Boysel, S., Nagle, F., Peng, S., and ell, J. R., Srivastava, S., Cao, X. E., Agarwal, D., and Xu, K. 2024. “Generative AI and the Nature of Work.” others. 2023. “AI in Search of Human Help.” Science Hilbert, M., and Darmon, D. 2020. “How Complexity Working Paper 25-021, Harvard Business School, Cam- 381(6654): 162–163. and Uncertainty Grew with Algorithmic Trading.” En- bridge, MA. tropy 22(5): 499. Helber, P., Bischke, B., Dengel, A., and Borth, D. Hoffreumon, C., Forman, C., and van Zeebroeck, 2019. “Eurosat: A Novel Dataset and Deep Learning Hill, K. 2023. Your Face Belongs to Us: A Tale of AI, N. 2024. “Make or Buy Your Artificial Intelligence? Benchmark for Land Use and Land Cover Classifica- a Secretive Startup, and the End of Privacy. Random Complementarities in Technology Sourcing.” Journal tion.” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth House. of Economics & Management Strategy 33(2): 452–479. Observations and Remote Sensing 12(7): 2217–2226. Hinduja, S. 2023. “Generative AI as a Vector for Ha- Hofman, J. M., Sharma, A., and Watts, D. J. 2017. Henderson, D. A. 1987. “Principles and Lessons from rassment and Harm.” Cyberbullying Research Center. “Prediction and Explanation in Social Systems.” Sci- the Smallpox Eradication Programme.” Bulletin of the https://cyberbullying.org/generative-ai-as-a-vector-for ence 355(6324): 486–488. World Health Organization 65(4): 535. -harassment-and-harm. Accessed 21 January 2025. Hofman, J. M., Watts, D. J., Athey, S., Garip, F., Henderson, M. 2022. “Radiology Facing a Global Hinkley, T., Brown, H., Carson, V., and Teychenne, M. Griffiths, T. L., Kleinberg, J., Margetts, H., and others. Shortage.” RSNA News [Blog], Radiological Society 2018. “Cross Sectional Associations of Screen Time 2021. “Integrating Explanation and Prediction in Com- of North America, 10 May. https://www.rsna.org/news and Outdoor Play with Social Skills in Preschool Chil- putational Social Science.” Nature 595(7866): 181–188. /2022/may/global-radiologist-shortage. dren.” PloS one 13(4): e0193700. Hofmann, V., Kalluri, P. R., Jurafsky, D., and King, S. Henkel, O., Horne-Robinson, H., Kozhakhmetova, N., Hinton, G. 2016. “On Radiology.” Machine Learning 2024. “AI Generates Covertly Racist Decisions About and Lee, A. 2024. “Effective and Scalable Math Sup- and Market for Intelligence Conference, Toronto, ON. People Based on Their Dialect.” Nature 633(8028): port: Evidence on the Impact of an AI-Tutor on Math 147–154. Achievement in Ghana.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402 Hirvonen, J., Stenhammar, A., and Tuhkuri, J. 2022. .09809. “New Evidence on the Effect of Technology on Employ- Hofmeyr, J.-H. S. 2021. “A Biochemically-realisable Re- ment and Skill Demand.” ETLA Working Papers 93, The lational Model of the Self-manufacturing Cell.” BioSys- Henrich, J. 2015. The Secret of Our Success: The Research Institute of the Finnish Economy. tems 207: 104463. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human .2021.104463. Evolution, Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Hitsuwari, J., Ueda, Y., Yun, W., and Nomura, M. Smarter. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 2023. “Does Human–AI Collaboration Lead to More Hogg, L., DiResta, R., Fukuyama, F., Reisman, R., Creative Art? Aesthetic Evaluation of Human-Made and Keller, D., Ovadya, A., Thorburn, L., Stray, J., and Henrich, J., and McElreath, R. 2003. “The Evolution of AI-Generated Haiku Poetry.” Computers in Human Be- Mathur, S. 2024. “Shaping the Future of Social Media Cultural Evolution.” Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, havior 139: 107502. with Middleware.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.10283. News, and Reviews 12(3): 123–135. REFERENCES 237 Holloway, C., and Barbareschi, G. 2022. Disabil- Huang, Y., and Xiong, D. 2023. “CBBQ: A Chinese IBM. 2021. “Accelerated Discovery of Battery Materi- ity Interactions: Creating Inclusive Innovations. Cham: Bias Benchmark Dataset Curated with Human-AI Col- als.” IBM Research. https://research.ibm.com/projects Springer Nature. laboration for Large Language Models.” arXiv preprint /accelerated-discovery-of-battery-materials. arXiv:2306.16244. Holly, L., Demaio, S., and Kickbusch, I. 2024. “Public Ibrahim, H., Liu, F., Asim, R., Battu, B., Benabderrah- Health Interventions to Address Digital Determinants Huggett, J. 2021. “Algorithmic Agency and Autonomy mane, S., Alhafni, B., Adnan, W., and others. 2023. of Children’s Health and Wellbeing.” The Lancet Public in Archaeological Practice.” Open Archaeology 7(1): “Perception, Performance, and Detectability of Con- Health 9(9): e700–e704. 417–434. versational Artificial Intelligence across 32 University Courses.” Scientific Reports 13(1): 12187. Holton, K. F., and Nigg, J. T. 2020. “The Association Huggett, J. 2022. “Is Less More? Slow Data and Datafi- of Lifestyle Factors and Adhd in Children.” Journal of cation in Archaeology. Critical Archaeology in the Digi- Ichien, N., Stamenković, D., and Holyoak, K. J. 2024. Attention Disorders 24(11): 1511–1520. tal Age: Proceedings of the 12th IEMA Visiting Scholar’s “Large Language Model Displays Emergent Ability to Conference.” Cotsen Institute of Archaeology Press, Interpret Novel Literary Metaphors.” Metaphor and Hong, L., and Page, S. 2011. “The Foundations of Col- 97–110. Symbol 39(4): 296–309. lective Wisdom.” Collective Wisdom: Principles and Mechanisms: 1–33. Hui, X., Reshef, O., and Zhou, L. 2024. “The Short- IFPI (International Federation of the Phonographic Term Effects of Generative Artificial Intelligence on Industry). 2024. Global Music Report 2025. London. Hong, L., and Page, S. E. 2004. “Groups of Diverse Employment: Evidence from an Online Labor Market.” Problem Solvers Can Outperform Groups of High- Organization Science 35(6): 1977–1989. Ijaz, K., Bogdanovych, A., and Trescak, T. 2017. “Vir- Ability Problem Solvers.” Proceedings of the National tual Worlds Vs Books and Videos in History Education.” Academy of Sciences 101(46): 16385–16389. Hullman, J., Holtzman, A., and Gelman, A. 2023. Interactive Learning Environments 25(7): 904–929. “Artificial Intelligence and Aesthetic Judgment.” arXiv Honneth, A. 2024. The Working Sovereign: Labour preprint arXiv:2309.12338. ILO (International Labour Organization). 2012. “Inter- and Democratic Citizenship. John Wiley & Sons. national Standard Classification of Occupations ISCO- Hulten, C. R. 1978. “Growth Accounting with Interme- 08 Volume 1: Structure, Group Definitions and Corre- Hopster, J. 2024. “Socially Disruptive Technologies diate Inputs.” The Review of Economic Studies 45(3): spondence Table.” Geneva. https://webapps.ilo.org and Epistemic Injustice.” Ethics and Information Tech- 511–518. /ilostat-files/ISCO/newdocs-08-2021/ISCO-08/ISCO-08 nology 26(1): 14. %20EN%20Vol%201.pdf. Humeau, E., and Deshpande, T. 2024. “AI for Africa: Horvath, J. 2024. “3 Critical Problems Gen AI Poses Use Cases Delivering Impact.” London: GSMA. ILO (International Labour Organization). 2025. “So- for Learning. Harvard Business Publishing Education.” cial Dialogue and Tripartism.” https://www.ilo.org/topics https://hbsp.harvard.edu/inspiring-minds/the-limits-of Humlum, A., and Vestergaard, E. 2024. “The Adop- -and-sectors/social-dialogue-and-tripartism. Accessed -gen-ai-educators-in-higher-ed. Accessed 20 January tion of ChatGPT.” BFI Working Paper 2024-50, Fried- 11 March 2025. 2025. man Institute for Economics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL. Imbs, J., and Wacziarg, R. 2003. “Stages of Diversifi- Hosny, A., and Sollaci, A. 2022. Digitalization and So- cation.” American Economic Review 93(1): 63–86. cial Protection: Macro and Micro Lessons for Vietnam. Humlum, A., and Vestergaard, E. 2025. “The Unequal Working Paper 2022/185, International Monetary Fund, Adoption of ChatGPT Exacerbates Existing Inequalities IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2024. World Eco- Washington, DC. among Workers.” Proceedings of the National Acad- nomic Outlook database. October 2024 Edition. Wash- emy of Sciences 122(1): e2414972121. ington, DC. https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/WEO Hosseinioun, M., Neffke, F., Zhang, L., and Youn, H. /weo-database/2024/October. Accessed 5 December 2025. “Skill Dependencies Uncover Nested Human Hunkenschroer, A. L., and Luetge, C. 2022. “Ethics 2024. Capital.” Nature Human Behaviour 9(4). of AI-Enabled Recruiting and Selection: A Review and Research Agenda.” Journal of Business Ethics 178(4): Indraratna, P., Tardo, D., Yu, J., Delbaere, K., Brodie, Howcroft, D., and Rubery, J. 2018. “Gender Equality 977–1007. M., Lovell, N., and Ooi, S.-Y. 2020. “Mobile Phone Prospects and the Fourth Industrial Revolution.” Praise Technologies in the Management of Ischemic Heart for Work in the Digital Age 63. Hunt, J., Cockburn, I. M., and Bessen, J. 2024. “Is Disease, Heart Failure, and Hypertension: Systematic Distance from Innovation a Barrier to the Adoption of Review and Meta-Analysis.” JMIR mHealth and uHealth Hu, B. Y., Johnson, G. K., Teo, T., and Wu, Z. 2020. Artificial Intelligence?” Working Paper 33022, National 8(7): e16695. “Relationship between Screen Time and Chinese Chil- Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. dren’s Cognitive and Social Development.” Journal of INHOPE. 2023. “Annual Report 2023.” https://inhope Research in Childhood Education 34(2): 183–207. Huo, F. Y., Manrique, P. D., and Johnson, N. F. 2024. .org/media/pages/articles/annual-reports/6a4f5f6bd2 “Multispecies Cohesion: Humans, Machinery, AI, and -1719393584/inhope-annual-report-2023.pdf. Ac- Huang, B., Huan, Y., Xu, L. D., Zheng, L., and Zou, Beyond.” Physical Review Letters 133(24): 247401. cessed 1 November 2024. Z. 2019. “Automated Trading Systems Statistical and Machine Learning Methods and Hardware Implemen- Hurwitz, L. B., and Schmitt, K. L. 2020. “Can Children Inklaar, R., Marapin, R., and Gräler, K. 2024. “Trad- tation: A Survey.” Enterprise Information Systems 13(1): Benefit from Early Internet Exposure? Short-and Long- ability and Sectoral Productivity Differences across 132–144. Term Links between Internet Use, Digital Skill, and Countries.” IMF Economic Review. DOI: 10.1057/ Academic Performance.” Computers & Education 146: s41308-024-00271-w. Huang, L., Yu, W., Ma, W., Zhong, W., Feng, Z., Wang, 103750. H., Chen, Q., and others. 2025. “A Survey on Halluci- Internet Watch Foundation. 2024. “What Has nation in Large Language Models: Principles, Taxono- Hussein, S. 2022. “The Global Demand for Migrant Changed in the AI CSAM Landscape?” https://www my, Challenges, and Open Questions.” ACM Transac- Care Workers: Drivers and Implications on Migrants’ .iwf.org.uk/media/nadlcb1z/iwf-ai-csam-report_update tions on Information Systems 43(2): 42. Wellbeing.” Sustainability 14(17): 10612. -public-jul24v13.pdf. Accessed 17 September 2024. Huang, M., Jin, M., and Li, N. 2024. “Augmenting Huszár, F., Ktena, S. I., Obrien, C., Belli, L., Schlaikjer, Invoca. 2023. “The State of the Contact Center Report Minds or Automating Skills: The Differential Role of A., and Hardt, M. 2022. “Algorithmic Amplification of 2023.” https://experience.invoca.com/the-state-of-the Human Capital in Generative AI’s Impact on Creative Politics on Twitter.” Proceedings of the National Acad- -contact-center-report/. Accessed 30 January 2024. Tasks.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.03963. emy of Sciences of the United States of America 119(1). IPIE (International Panel on the Information Environ- Huang, S., Lai, X., Li, Y., Cui, Y., and Wang, Y. 2023. Hutton, J. S., Dudley, J., Horowitz-Kraus, T., DeWitt, ment). 2024a. “Global Approaches to Auditing Artifi- “Beyond Screen Time: The Different Longitudinal Rela- T., and Holland, S. K. 2020. “Associations between cial Intelligence: A Literature Review.” Zurich: IPIE. tions between Adolescents’ Smartphone Use Content Screen-Based Media Use and Brain White Matter In- and Their Mental Health.” Children 10(5): 770. tegrity in Preschool-Aged Children.” JAMA Pediatrics 174(1): e193869. 238 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 IPIE (International Panel on the Information Envi- https://www.un.org/digital-emerging-technologies/sites Jamali, H., Dascalu, S. M., and Harris, F. C. AI-Driven ronment). 2024b. Trends in the Global Information /www.un.org.techenvoy/files/GDC-submission_ITU.pdf. Analysis and Prediction of Energy Consumption in Environment. NYC’s Municipal Buildings. 2024 IEEE/ACIS 22nd In- ITU (International Telecommunication Union). ternational Conference on Software Engineering Re- IPIE (International Panel on the Information Environ- 2023d. “Facts and Figures 2023.” Geneva. search, Management and Applications (SERA), 2024- ment). 2025. “Towards a Global AI Auditing Frame- 05 2024. 277–283. work: Assessment and Recommendations.” Zurich: IPIE. ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2024a. “ Global and Regional ICT Data.” https:// Jarrahi, M. H., Lutz, C., and Newlands, G. 2022. “Arti- Ipsos. 2023. “Global Views on AI.” https://www.ipsos datahub.itu.int/. Accessed 25 March 2025. ficial Intelligence, Human Intelligence and Hybrid Intel- .com/sites/default/files/ct/news/documents/2023-07 ligence Based on Mutual Augmentation.” Big Data & /Ipsos%20Global%20AI%202023%20Report-WEB ITU (International Telecommunication Union). Society 9(2): 20539517221142824. _0.pdf. Accessed 22 August 2024. 2024b. “Individuals Using the Internet.” https:// datahub .itu.int/data/?i=11624&v=chart&d=Age&g=9224. Jarrahi, M. H., Möhlmann, M., and Lee, M. K. 2023. IPU (Inter-Parliamentary Union) and APU (African Accessed 23 March 2025. “Algorithmic Management: The Role of AI in Managing Parliamentary Union). 2021. “Sexism, Harassment Workforces.” MIT Sloan Management Review 64(3): and Violence against Women Parliamentarians in ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 1–5. Africa.” https://www.ipu.org/resources/publications 2024c. “The Digital Sector’s Environmental Dilemma.” /issue-briefs/2021-11/sexism-harassment-and-violence https://www.itu.int/hub/2024/11/the-digital-sectors Jasanoff, S. 2016. The Ethics of Invention: Technology -against-women-in-parliaments-in-africa. Accessed 28 -environmental-dilemma/. Accessed 4 November and the Human Future. W.W. Norton & Company. April 2025. 2025. Javidan, N., Kavian, A., Pourghasemi, H. R., Cono- Irmer, A., and Schmiedek, F. 2023. “Associations be- ITU (International Telecommunication Union). scenti, C., Jafarian, Z., and Rodrigo-Comino, J. 2021. tween Youth’s Daily Social Media Use and Well-Being 2024d. “Measuring Digital Development: Facts and “Evaluation of Multi-Hazard Map Produced Using Max- Are Mediated by Upward Comparisons.” Communica- Figures 2024.” International Telecommunication Union ent Machine Learning Technique.” Scientific Reports tions Psychology 1(12). (ITU). 11(1): 6496. Irvine, R., Boubert, D., Raina, V., Liusie, A., Zhu, Z., ITU (International Telecommunication Union). Jennings, J. 2023. “AI in Education: The Bias Dilem- Mudupalli, V., Korshuk, A., and others. 2023. “Re- n.d. “The UMC Project.” https://www.itu.int/itu ma.” https://www.esparklearning.com/blog/get-to-know warding Chatbots for Real-World Engagement with Mil- -d/sites/projectumc/home/the-umc-project/. Accessed -ai-the-bias-dilemma. Accessed 13 October 2023. lions of Users.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.06135. 11 March 2025. Jensen, T., Seerup Hass, F., Seam Akbar, M., Holm Ishida, T., Ihsan, A. F., and Rudawan, R. A. 2024. “Ad- IWF (Internet Watch Foundation). 2023. “How AI Is Petersen, P., and Jokar Arsanjani, J. 2020. “Employ- vancing Global South University Education with Large Being Abused to Create Child Sexual Abuse Imag- ing Machine Learning for Detection of Invasive Species Language Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07139. ery.” https://www.iwf.org.uk/media/q4zll2ya/iwf-ai-csam Using Sentinel-2 and Aviris Data: The Case of Kudzu in -report_public-oct23v1.pdf. Accessed 17 September the United States.” Sustainability 12(9): 3544. Ishowo-Oloko, F., Bonnefon, J.-F., Soroye, Z., Cran- 2024. dall, J., Rahwan, I., and Rahwan, T. 2019. “Behavioural Jesson, A., Beltran-Velez, N., Chu, Q., Karlekar, S., Evidence for a Transparency–Efficiency Tradeoff in IWF (Internet Watch Foundation). 2024. “What Has Kossen, J., Gal, Y., Cunningham, J. P., and Blei, D. Human–Machine Cooperation.” Nature Machine Intel- Changed in the AI CSAM Landscape? AI CSAM Report 2024. “Estimating the Hallucination Rate of Generative ligence 1(11): 517–521. Update.” https://www.iwf.org.uk/media/nadlcb1z/iwf-ai AI.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07457. -csam-report_update-public-jul24v13.pdf. Accessed 3 Ismagilova, E., Hughes, L., Rana, N. P., and Dwivedi, October 2024. Ji, J., Qiu, T., Chen, B., Zhang, B., Lou, H., Wang, K., Y. K. 2022. “Security, Privacy and Risks within Smart Duan, Y., and others. 2023. “AI Alignment: A Compre- Cities: Literature Review and Development of a Smart Jaeger, J. 2024. “Artificial Intelligence is Algorithmic hensive Survey.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.19852. City Interaction Framework.” Information Systems Fron- Mimicry: Why Artificial “Agents” Are Not (and Won’t Be) tiers: 1–22. Proper Agents.” Neurons, Behavior, Data Analysis, and Jia, C., Lam, M. S., Mai, M. C., Hancock, J. T., and Theory February: 1–21. https://doi.org/10.51628/001c Bernstein, M. S. 2024a. “Embedding Democratic Val- ITU (International Telecommunication Union) and .94404. ues into Social Media AIs Via Societal Objective Func- FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization). 2021. tions.” Proceedings of the ACM: Human-Computer In- Digital Agriculture in Action: Artificial Intelligence for Jaeger, J., A. Riedl, A. Djedovic, J. Vervaeke, and D. teraction 8, CSCW1: Article 163. Agriculture. ITU and FAO. Walsh. 2024. “Naturalizing Relevance Realization: Why Agency and Cognition Are Fundamentally Not Compu- Jia, N., Luo, X., Fang, Z., and Liao, C. 2024. “When ITU (International Telecommunication Union). tational.” Frontiers in Psychology 15: 1362658. https:// and How Artificial Intelligence Augments employee 2021. “ICTs & Digital Health.” https://www.itu.int/en doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1362658. Creativity.” Academy of Management Journal 67(1): /mediacentre/backgrounders/Pages/icts-digital-health 5–32. .aspx. Accessed 4 November /11/2025 2025. Jahan, N., Barbareschi, G., Jan, C. A., Mutuku, C. M., Rahman, N., Austin, V., and Holloway, C. 2020. Jia, P., Du, Z., Wang, Y., Zhao, X., Li, X., Wang, Y., ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2022. “Inclusion and Independence: The Impact of Mobile Liu, Q., Guo, H., and Tang, R. 2024b. “ALtFs: Agency- “How AI Is Helping Revitalise Indigenous Languag- Technology on the Lives of Persons with Disabilities Light Feature Selection with Large Language Models es.” https://www.itu.int/hub/2022/08/ai-indigenous in Kenya and Bangladesh.” 2020 IEEE Global Humani- in Deep Recommender Systems.” arXiv preprint arXiv: -languages-maori-te-reo/. tarian Technology Conference (GHTC), 29 October–1 2412.08516. November. ITU (International Telecommunication Union). Jiang, J., Wu, D., Deng, H., Long, Y., Tang, W., Li, X., 2023a. Cyber Risks, Threats, and Harms in the Meta- Jain, P., Coogan, S. C. P., Subramanian, S. G., Crow- Liu, C., and others. 2024. “HAIGEN: Towards Human- verse. ITU Focus Group Technical Report. ley, M., Taylor, S., and Flannigan, M. D. 2020. “A Re- AI Collaboration for Facilitating Creativity and Style view of Machine Learning Applications in Wildfire Sci- Generation in Fashion Design.” Proceedings of the ITU (International Telecommunication Union). ence and Management.” Environmental Reviews 28(4): ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous 2023b. “Digital Inclusion of All.” https://www.itu.int/en 478–505. Technologies 8(3): Article 107. /mediacentre/backgrounders/Pages/digital-inclusion -of-all.aspx. Accessed 11 April 2025. Jakesch, M., Hancock, J. T., and Naaman, M. 2023. Jiang, J., Zou, X., Mitchell, R. N., Zhang, Y., Zhao, “Human Heuristics for AI-Generated Language Are Y., Yin, Q.-Z., Yang, W., and others. 2024. “Sediment ITU (International Telecommunication Union). Flawed.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- Subduction in Hadean Revealed by Machine Learning.” 2023c. “ITU’s Inputs to the Global Digital Compact.” ences 120(11): e2208839120. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 121(30): e2405160121. REFERENCES 239 Jiang, W., Park, J., Xiao, R. J., and Zhang, S. 2025. Engagement and Learning Outcomes.” British Journal Kaplan, D. M., Palitsky, R., Arconada Alvarez, S. J., “AI and the Extended Workday: Productivity, Contract- of Educational Technology. Pozzo, N. S., Greenleaf, M. N., Atkinson, C. A., and ing Efficiency, and Distribution of Rents.” Working Paper Lam, W. A. 2024. “What’s in a Name? Experimental 33536, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam- Jordan, M. I., and Mitchell, T. M. 2015. “Machine Evidence of Gender Bias in Recommendation Letters bridge, MA. Learning: Trends, Perspectives, and Prospects.” Sci- Generated by ChatGPT.” Journal of Medical Internet ence 349(6245): 255–260. Research 26: e51837. Jigsaw. 2024. “Announcing Experimental Bridging Attributes in Perspective API.” https://medium.com Jörke, M., Sapkota, S., Warkenthien, L., Vainio, N., Kapoor, S., and Narayanan, A. 2023. “Leakage and /jigsaw/announcing-experimental-bridging-attributes Schmiedmayer, P., Brunskill, E., and Landay, J. 2024. the Reproducibility Crisis in Machine-Learning-Based -in-perspective-api-578a9d59ac37. “Supporting Physical Activity Behavior Change with Science.” Patterns 4(9): 100804. LLM-Based Conversational Agents.” arXiv preprint Jin, J., Walker, J., and Reczek, R. W. 2024. “Avoiding arXiv:2405.06061. Kapoor, S., and Narayanan, A. 2024. “We Looked at 78 Embarrassment Online: Response to and Inferences Election Deepfakes. Political Misinformation Is Not an AI About Chatbots When Purchases Activate Self-Pre- J-PAL (Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab). 2023. Problem.” https://knightcolumbia.org /blog/we-looked- sentation Concerns.” Journal of Consumer Psychology “Vocational and Skills Training Programs to Improve La- at-78-election-deepfakes-political -misinformation-is- n/a(n/a): 1–18. bor Market Outcomes.” https://www.povertyactionlab not-an-ai-problem. Accessed April 2025. .org/policy-insight/vocational-and-skills-training Jindal, S. 2023. “Valuing Data Enrichment Work- -programs-improve-labor-market-outcomes. Accessed Kapoor, S., Bommasani, R., Klyman, K., Longpre, S., ers: The Case for a Human-Centric Approach to AI 2 February 2025. Ramaswami, A., Cihon, P., Hopkins, A., and others. Development.” https://www.un.org/en/un-chronicle 2024a. “On the Societal Impact of Open Foundation /valuing-data-enrichment-workers-case-human-centric Jumper, J., Evans, R., Pritzel, A., Green, T., Figurnov, Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07918. -approach-ai-development. M., Ronneberger, O., Tunyasuvunakool, K., and oth- ers. 2021. “Highly Accurate Protein Structure Predic- Kapoor, S., Cantrell, E. M., Peng, K., Pham, T. H., Bail, Jing, C., and Foltz, J. D. 2024. “Can the Service Sector tion with Alphafold.” Nature 596(7873): 583–589. C. A., Gundersen, O. E., Hofman, J. M., and others. Lead Structural Transformation in Africa? Evidence from 2024. “Reforms: Consensus-Based Recommendations Côte d’Ivoire.” Presented at the 2024 Annual Meeting Just Economy and Labor Institute. 2022. “Centring for Machine-Learning-Based Science.” Science Ad- of the Agricultural and Applied Economics Association, the Agency of Women in Thailand’s Platform-Based vances 10(18): eadk3452. 28–30 July, New Orleans, LA. Care Economy.” https://connected2work.org/blog /centering-the-agency-of-women-in-thailands-platform Kapoor, S., Henderson, P., and Narayanan, A. 2024. Jobin, A., Ienca, M., and Vayena, E. 2019. “The Global -based-care-economy%E2%80%AF/. Accessed 28 “Promises and Pitfalls of Artificial Intelligence for Legal Landscape of AI Ethics Guidelines.” Nature Machine April 2025. Applications.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01656. Intelligence 1(9): 389–399. Kaack, L. H., Donti, P. L., Strubell, E., Kamiya, G., Kapoor, S., Stroebl, B., Siegel, Z. S., Nadgir, N., and Johnson, S. G., Bilovich, A., and Tuckett, D. 2023. Creutzig, F., and Rolnick, D. 2022. “Aligning Artificial Narayanan, A. 2024b. “AI Agents That Matter.” arXiv “Conviction Narrative Theory: A Theory of Choice Intelligence with Climate Change Mitigation.” Nature preprint arXiv:2407.01502. under Radical Uncertainty.” Behavioral and Brain Sci- Climate Change 12(6): 518–527. ences 46: e82. Karabarbounis, L. 2024. “Perspectives on the La- Kahan, D. M. 2015. “The Politically Motivated Reason- bor Share.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 38(2): Johri, S., Jeong, J., Tran, B. A., Schlessinger, D. I., ing Paradigm.” Emerging Trends in Social & Behavioral 107–136. Wongvibulsin, S., Barnes, L. A., Zhou, H.-Y., and oth- Sciences, Forthcoming. ers. 2025. “An Evaluation Framework for Clinical Use Karabarbounis, L., and Neiman, B. 2013. “The Global of Large Language Models in Patient Interaction Tasks.” Kahl, S., Wood, C. M., Eibl, M., and Klinck, H. 2021. Decline of the Labor Share.” The Quarterly Journal of Nature Medicine 31(1): 77–86. “Birdnet: A Deep Learning Solution for Avian Diversity Economics 129(1): 61–103. Monitoring.” Ecological Informatics 61: 101236. Jones, B. F. 2009. “The Burden of Knowledge and Karell, D., Sachs, J., and Barrett, R. 2025. “Synthetic the ‘Death of the Renaissance Man:’ Is Innovation Get- Kalai, A., and Vempala, S. 2024. “Calibrated Lan- Duality: A Framework for Analyzing Generative Artificial ting Harder?” The Review of Economic Studies 76(1): guage Models Must Hallucinate.” arXiv preprint arXiv: Intelligence’s Representation of Social Reality.” Poetics 283–317. 2311.14648. 108: 101966. Jones, C. I. 2023. “Recipes and Economic Growth: A Kalla, S. 2022. “Hacking Platform Capitalism: The Case Karger, E., Bastani, H., Yueh-Han, C., Jacobs, Z., Ha- Combinatorial March down an Exponential Tail.” Jour- of Domestic Workers on South Africa’s Sweepsouth lawi, D., Zhang, F., and Tetlock, P. E. 2024. “Forecast- nal of Political Economy 131(8): 1994–2031. Platform.” Gender & Development 30(3): 655–666. bench: A Dynamic Benchmark of AI Forecasting Capa- bilities.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.19839. Jones, C. I. 2024. “The AI Dilemma: Growth Versus Kamminga, J., Ayele, E., Meratnia, N., and Havinga, Existential Risk.” American Economic Review: Insights P. 2018. “Poaching Detection Technologies—a Survey.” Kather, J. N., Ferber, D., Wiest, I. C., Gilbert, S., and 6(4): 575–590. Sensors 18(5): 1474. Truhn, D. 2024. “Large Language Models Could Make Natural Language Again the Universal Interface of Jones, C. I. 2025. “How Much Should We Spend to Re- Kanazawa, K., Kawaguchi, D., Shigeoka, H., and Healthcare.” Nature Medicine 30(10): 2708–2710. duce AI’s Existential Risk?” Working Paper 33602, Na- Watanabe, Y. 2022. “AI, Skill, and Productivity: The tional Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Case of Taxi Drivers.” Working Paper 30612, National Katz, D. M., Bommarito, M. J., Gao, S., and Arre- Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. dondo, P. 2024. “GPT-4 Passes the Bar Exam.” Philo- Jones, N. 2025. “How AI Can Achieve Human-Level sophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathe- Intelligence: Researchers Call for Change in Tack.” Kang, H., and Lou, C. 2022. “AI Agency Vs. Human matical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 382(2270): Nature. Agency: Understanding Human–AI Interactions on 20230254. Tiktok and Their Implications for User Engagement.” Jongaramrungruang, S., Thorpe, A. K., Matheou, G., Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 27(5). Katzman, J., Wang, A., Scheuerman, M., Blodgett, S. and Frankenberg, C. 2022. “Methanet–an AI-Driven L., Laird, K., Wallach, H., and Barocas, S. 2023. “Tax- Approach to Quantifying Methane Point-Source Emis- Kapari, M., Sibanda, M., Magidi, J., Mabhaudhi, T., onomizing and Measuring Representational Harms: A sion from High-Resolution 2-D Plume Imagery.” Remote Nhamo, L., and Mpandeli, S. 2024. “Comparing Ma- Look at Image Tagging.” Proceedings of the AAAI Con- Sensing of Environment 269: 112809. chine Learning Algorithms for Estimating the Maize ference on Artificial Intelligence, 14277–14285. Crop Water Stress Index (Cwsi) Using UAV-Acquired Jordan, K., Myers, C., Damani, K., Khagame, P., Remotely Sensed Data in Smallholder Croplands.” Kaufman, J. H., Woo, A., Eagan, J., Lee, S., and Mumbi, A., and Njuguna, L. 2024. “Supporting Equi- Drones 8(2): 61. Kassan, E. B. 2025. “Uneven Adoption of Artificial table Access to Learning Via Sms in Kenya: Impact on 240 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Intelligence Tools among US Teachers and Principals in Khan, C., Blount, D., Parham, J., Holmberg, J., Ham- Models for Medical Decision-Making.” arXiv preprint the 2023–2024 School Year.” RAND Research Report. ilton, P., Charlton, C., Christiansen, F., and others. arXiv:2411.00248. 2022a. “Artificial Intelligence for Right Whale Photo Kazienko, P., and Cambria, E. 2024. “Toward Respon- Identification: From Data Science Competition to King-Dejardin, A. 2019. “The Social Construction of sible Recommender Systems.” IEEE Intelligent Systems Worldwide Collaboration.” Mammalian Biology 102(3): Migrant Care Work. At the Intersection of Care, Mi- 39(3): 5–12. 1025–1042. gration and Gender.” Geneva: International Labour Organization. Ke, L., Tong, S., Cheng, P., and Peng, K. 2024. “Ex- Khan, M. H., Williams, J., Williams, P., and Mayes, R. ploring the Frontiers of LLMs in Psychological Applica- 2024. “Caring in the Gig Economy: A Relational Per- Kirk, H. R., Vidgen, B., Röttger, P., and Hale, S. A. tions: A Comprehensive Review.” arXiv preprint arXiv: spective of Decent Work.” Work, Employment and So- 2023. “Personalisation within Bounds: A Risk Taxono- 2401.01519. ciety 38(4): 1107–1127. my and Policy Framework for the Alignment of Large Language Models with Personalised Feedback.” arXiv Keller, B., and Willke, T. 2019. “Snotbot: A Whale of a Khan, M., Khurshid, M., Vatsa, M., Singh, R., Dug- preprint arXiv:2303.05453. Deep-Learning Project.” IEEE Spectrum 56(12): 41–53. gal, M., and Singh, K. 2022b. “On AI Approaches for Promoting Maternal and Neonatal Health in Low Re- Kirk, H. R., Vidgen, B., Röttger, P., and Hale, S. A. Kelling, S., Gerbracht, J., Fink, D., Lagoze, C., Wong, source Settings: A Review.” Frontiers in Public Health 2024. “The Benefits, Risks and Bounds of Personal- W.-K., Yu, J. , Damoulas, T., and Gomes, C. 2012. 10: 880034. izing the Alignment of Large Language Models to In- “eBird: A Human/Computer Learning Network for Bio- dividuals.” Nature Machine Intelligence 6(4): 383–392. diversity Conservation and Research.” Proceedings of Khan, S. 2024. Brave New Words: How AI Will Revo- the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence 26(2): lutionize Education (and Why That’s a Good Thing). Kirk, R., Mediratta, I., Nalmpantis, C., Luketina, J., 2229–2236. Penguin. Hambro, E., Grefenstette, E., and Raileanu, R. 2023. “Understanding the Effects of RLHF on LLM Generali- Kelling, S., Gerbracht, J., Fink, D., Lagoze, C., Wong, Khan, W., Leem, S., See, K. B., Wong, J. K., Zhang, sation and Diversity.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06452. W.-K., Yu, J., Damoulas, T., and Gomes, C. 2013. “A S., and Fang, R. 2025. “A Comprehensive Survey of Human/Computer Learning Network to Improve Bio- Foundation Models in Medicine.” IEEE Reviews in Bio- Kirkby-McLeod, L. 2023. “How Will ChatGPT Impact Te diversity Conservation and Research.” AI Magazine medical Engineering: 1–20. Reo Māori? Data Sovereignty Experts Weigh In.” https:// 34(1): 10. www.rnz.co.nz/news/te-manu-korihi/491925/how-will Khosravi, M., Mojtabaeian, S. M., Demiray, E. K. D., -chatgpt-impact-te-reo-maori-data-sovereignty-experts Kelly, M., and Gráda, C. Ó. 2000. “Market Contagion: and Sayar, B. 2024. “A Systematic Review of the Out- -weigh-in. Evidence from the Panics of 1854 and 1857.” American comes of Utilization of Artificial Intelligence within the Economic Review 90(5): 1110–1124. Healthcare Systems of the Middle East: A Thematic Kirkpatrick, J., Pascanu, R., Rabinowitz, N., Veness, Analysis of Findings.” Health Science Reports 7(12): J., Desjardins, G., Rusu, A. A., Milan, K., and others. Kelly, M., Mokyr, J., and Ó Gráda, C. 2023. “The Me- e70300. 2017. “Overcoming Catastrophic Forgetting in Neural chanics of the Industrial Revolution.” Journal of Political Networks.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Economy 131(1): 59–94. Khoury, R. B., and Scott, E. K. 2024. “Going Local with- Sciences 114(13): 3521–3526. out Localization: Power and Humanitarian Response in Kelly, Y., Zilanawala, A., Booker, C., and Sacker, the Syrian War.” World Development 174: 106460. Kirkpatrick, M., Rivera, G., and Akers, J. 2022. “Sys- A. 2018. “Social Media Use and Adolescent Mental tematic Review of Behavioral Interventions Using Health: Findings from the Uk Millennium Cohort Study.” Kidd, C., and Birhane, A. 2023. “How AI Can Distort Digital Technology to Reduce Problem Behavior in the eClinicalMedicine 6: 59–68. Human Beliefs.” Science 380(6651): 1222–1223. Classroom.” Journal of Behavioral Education: 1–25. Kemene, E., Valkhof, B., and Greene-Dewasmes, G. Kim Eun-jin. 2025. “South Korea to Launch AI Comput- Kittur, A., and Kraut, R. E. 2008. “Harnessing the 2024. “AI and Energy: Will AI Reduce Emissions or In- ing Center with Significant Public-Private Investment.” Wisdom of Crowds in Wikipedia: Quality through Co- crease Demand?” World Economic Forum. https://www https://www.businesskorea.co.kr/news/articleView.html ordination.” Proceedings of the ACM Conference on .weforum.org/stories/2024/07/generative-ai-energy ?idxno=234159. Accessed 1 April 2025. Computer Supported Cooperative Work, ACM Press, -emissions/. New York, 37–46. Kim, A., Muhn, M., and Nikolaev, V. 2024. “Financial Kemp, S. 2025. “Digital 2025: Global Overview Re- Statement Analysis with Large Language Models.” arX- Kleinberg, J., and Raghavan, M. 2021. “Algorithmic port.” DataReportal. iv preprint arXiv:2407.17866. Monoculture and Social Welfare.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118(22): e2018340118. Kemp, S., and Erades Pérez, N. 2023. “Consumer Kim, H. Y., Cho, G. J., and Kwon, H. S. 2022. “Applica- Fraud against Older Adults in Digital Society: Examin- tions of Artificial Intelligence in Obstetrics.” Ultrasonog- Kleinberg, J., Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., and ing Victimization and Its Impact.” International Journal raphy 42(1): 2. Raghavan, M. 2024. “The Inversion Problem: Why of Environmental Research and Public Health 20(7): Algorithms Should Infer Mental State and Not Just Pre- 5404. Kim, H., Karaman, B. K., Zhao, Q., Wang, A. Q., Sabun- dict Behavior.” Perspectives on Psychological Science cu, M. R., and Initiative, A. s. D. N. 2025. “Learning- 19(5): 827–838. Kermani, H., and Aldemir, J. 2015. “Preparing Chil- Based Inference of Longitudinal Image Changes: Appli- dren for Success: Integrating Science, Math, and Tech- cations in Embryo Development, Wound Healing, and Kleinberg, J., Mullainathan, S., and Raghavan, M. nology in Early Childhood Classroom.” Early Child De- Aging Brain.” Proceedings of the National Academy of 2024. “The Challenge of Understanding What Users velopment and Care 185(9): 1504–1527. Sciences 122(8): e2411492122. Want: Inconsistent Preferences and Engagement Op- timization.” Management Science 70(9): 6336–6355. Kerry, C. F., Meltzer, J. P., Renda, A., and Wyckoff, A. Kim, J. 2023. “Four Ways AI Is Making the Power Grid W. 2025. “Network Architecture for Global AI Policy.” Faster and More Resilient.” MIT Techonolgy Review. Knayer, T., and Kryvinska, N. 2022. “An Analysis of The Brookings Institute. https://www.brookings.edu Smart Meter Technologies for Efficient Energy Man- /articles/network-architecture-for-global-ai-policy/. Kim, Y., Park, C., Jeong, H., Chan, Y. S., Xu, X., agement in Households and Organizations.” Energy McDuff, D., Lee, H., and others. 2025. “Mdagents: An Reports 8: 4022–4040. Khajeh Naeeni, S., and Nouhi, N. 2024. “The Envi- Adaptive Collaboration of LLMs for Medical Decision- ronmental Impacts of AI and Digital Technologies.” AI Making.” Advances in Neural Information Processing Koch, P., Stojkoski, V., and A. Hidalgo, C. 2024. “Aug- and Tech in Behavioral and Social Sciences 1(4): 11–18. Systems 37: 79410–79452. menting the Availability of Historical GDP Per Capita Es- timates through Machine Learning.” Proceedings of the Khalaf, A. M., Alubied, A. A., Khalaf, A. M., and Ri- Kim, Y., Park, C., Jeong, H., Grau-Vilchez, C., Chan, National Academy of Sciences 121(39): e2402060121. faey, A. A. 2023. “The Impact of Social Media on the Y. S., Xu, X., McDuff, D., and others. 2024. “A Demon- Mental Health of Adolescents and Young Adults: A Sys- stration of Adaptive Collaboration of Large Language Kochkov, D., Yuval, J., Langmore, I., Norgaard, P., tematic Review.” Cureus 15(8). Smith, J., Mooers, G., Klöwer, M., and others. 2024. REFERENCES 241 “Neural General Circulation Models for Weather and Korinek, A., and Stiglitz, J. E. 2020. “Steering Techno- Advantage.” Strategic Management Journal 44(6): Climate.” Nature. logical Progress.” NBER Conference on the Economics 1425–1452. of AI, 24–25 September. Kodate, N., Maeda, Y., Hauray, B., Tsujimura, M., Krämer, C., and Cazes, S. 2022. “Shaping the Transi- Chan, W., Mannan, H., Yu, W., and others. 2022. Korinek, A., and Stiglitz, J. E. 2021. “Artificial Intelli- tion: Artificial Intelligence and Social Dialogue.” OECD “Hopes and Fears Regarding Care Robots: Content gence, Globalization, and Strategies for Economic De- Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers 279, Analysis of Newspapers in East Asia and Western Eu- velopment.” Working Paper 28453, National Bureau of OECD Publishing, Paris. rope, 2001–2020.” Frontiers in Rehabilitation Sciences Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. 3: 1019089. Krishna, A. 2024. “Will AI Slay the Poverty Dragon?” Korinek, A., and Suh, D. 2024. “Scenarios for the Tran- Current History 123(849): 37–39. Koedinger, K. R., Corbett, A. T., and Perfetti, C. 2012. sition to AGI.” Working Paper 32255, National Bureau “The Knowledge-Learning-Instruction Framework: of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Krishna, S., Dubrosa, F., and Milanaik, R. 2024. “Ris- Bridging the Science-Practice Chasm to Enhance ing Threats of AI-Driven Child Sexual Abuse Material.” Robust Student Learning.” Cognitive Science 36(5): Korinek, A., and Vipra, J. 2024a. “Concentrating Intel- Pediatrics 153(2). 757–798. ligence: Scaling and Market Structure in Artificial Intel- ligence.” Economic Policy 40(121): 225–256. Kruse, H., Mensah, E., Sen, K., and de Vries, G. 2023. Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Schmidt, L. D., and “A Manufacturing (Re)Naissance? Industrialization in Seegmiller, B. 2021. “Technology, Vintage-Specific Korinek, A., and Vipra, J. 2024b. “Market Concen- the Developing World.” IMF Economic Review 71(2): Human Capital, and Labor Displacement: Evidence tration Implications of Foundation Models: The Invis- 439–473. from Linking Patents with Occupations.” Working Paper ible Hand of ChatGPT.” Washington, DC: Brookings 29552, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam- Institution. Kruse, H., Timmer, M. P., de Vries, G. J., and Ye, X. bridge, MA. 2024. “The Occupation Content of Trade.” The World Korte, M. 2020. “The Impact of the Digital Revolution Bank Economic Review. Kogan, L., Papanikolaou, D., Schmidt, L. D., and on Human Brain and Behavior: Where Do We Stand?” Seegmiller, B. 2023. “Technology and Labor Displace- Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 22(2): 101–111. Krzywdzinski, M., Gerst, D., and Butollo, F. 2023. ment: Evidence from Linking Patents with Worker-Level “Promoting Human-Centred AI in the Workplace. Trade Data.” Working Paper 31846, National Bureau of Eco- Kosinski, M. 2024. “Evaluating Large Language Mod- Unions and Their Strategies for Regulating the Use of nomic Research, Cambridge, MA. els in Theory of Mind Tasks.” Proceedings of the Na- AI in Germany.” Transfer: European Review of Labour tional Academy of Sciences 121(45): e2405460121. and Research 29(1): 53–70. Kolata, G. 2024. “Chatbots Defeated Doctors at Di- agnosing Illness.” NY Times. Available online: https:// Kotsiantis, S. B., Zaharakis, I. D., and Pintelas, P. E. Kudina, O., and van de Poel, I. 2024. “A Sociotech- www.nytimes.com/2024/11/17/health/chatgpt-ai-doctors 2006. “Machine Learning: A Review of Classification nical System Perspective on AI.” Minds and Machines -diagnosis.html. Accessed 23 November 2024. and Combining Techniques.” Artificial Intelligence Re- 34(3): 21. view 26: 159–190. Kopits, E., and Cropper, M. 2005. “Traffic Fatalities Kuenzel, R., Teizer, J., Mueller, M., and Blickle, A. and Economic Growth.” Accident Analysis & Preven- Kovacev, R. 2020. “A Taxing Dilemma: Robot Taxes 2016. “Smartsite: Intelligent and Autonomous Envi- tion 37(1): 169–178. and the Challenges of Effective Taxation of AI, Automa- ronments, Machinery, and Processes to Realize Smart tion and Robotics in the Fourth Industrial Revolution.” Road Construction Projects.” Automation in Construc- Kordzadeh, N., and Ghasemaghaei, M. 2022. “Algo- Ohio St. Tech. LJ 16: 182. tion 71: 21–33. rithmic Bias: Review, Synthesis, and Future Research Directions.” European Journal of Information Systems Kovalevskiy, O., Mateos-Garcia, J., and Tunyasuvu- Kulkov, I., Kulkova, J., Rohrbeck, R., Menvielle, L., 31(3): 388–409. nakool, K. 2024. “Alphafold Two Years On: Validation Kaartemo, V., and Makkonen, H. 2024. “Artificial Intel- and Impact.” Proceedings of the National Academy of ligence - Driven Sustainable Development: Examining Korero Maori. 2025. “Korero Maori.” https:// Sciences 121(34): e2315002121. Organizational, Technical, and Processing Approaches koreromaori.com/. to Achieving Global Goals.” Sustainable Development Kozyreva, A., Herzog, S. M., Lewandowsky, S., Her- 32(3): 2253–2267. Korinek, A. 2023a. “Generative AI for Economic Re- twig, R., Lorenz-Spreen, P., Leiser, M., and Reifler, J. search: Use Cases and Implications for Economists.” 2023. “Resolving Content Moderation Dilemmas be- Kumar, U., Amaglobeli, D., and Moszoro, M. 2023. Journal of Economic Literature 61(4): 1281–1317. tween Free Speech and Harmful Misinformation.” Pro- “Determinants and Social Dividends of Digital Adop- ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120(7): tion.” Working Paper 2023/065, International Monetary Korinek, A. 2023b. “Generative AI for Economic Re- e2210666120. Fund, Washington, DC. search: Use Cases and Implications for Economists.” Journal of Economic Literature 61(4): 1281–1317. Kozyreva, A., Lorenz-Spreen, P., Herzog, S. M., Ecker, Kurz, M. 2023. The Market Power of Technology: Un- U. K., Lewandowsky, S., Hertwig, R., Ali, A., and oth- derstanding the Second Gilded Age. Columbia Univer- Korinek, A. 2024a. “LLMs Learn to Collaborate and ers. 2024. “Toolbox of Individual-Level Interventions sity Press. Reason: December 2024 Update to “Generative AI for against Online Misinformation.” Nature human behav- Economic Research: Use Cases and Implications for iour 8(6): 1044–1052. Kutz, J. N., Brunton, S. L., Manohar, K., Lipson, H., Economists,” Published in the Journal of Economic.” and Li, N. 2024. “AI Institute in Dynamic Systems: De- Journal of Economic Literature 61(4). Kraemer, M. U. G., Tsui, J. L. H., Chang, S. Y., Lytras, veloping Machine Learning and AI Tools for Scientific S., Khurana, M. P., Vanderslott, S., Bajaj, S., and oth- Discovery, Engineering Design, and Data-Driven Con- Korinek, A. 2024b. “LLMs Level up—Better, Faster, ers. 2025. “Artificial Intelligence for Modelling Infec- trol.” AI Magazine 45(1): 48–53. Cheaper: June 2024 Update to Section 3 of “Genera- tious Disease Epidemics.” Nature 638(8051): 623–635. tive AI for Economic Research: Use Cases and Impli- Kwa, T., West, B., Becker, J., Deng, A., Garcia, K., Ha- cations for Economists,” Published in The.” Journal of Kraft, K., and Smith, J. D. 2019. “Between Internation- sin, M., Jawhar, S., and others. 2025. “Measuring AI Economic Literature 61(4): 1–38. al Donors and Local Faith Communities: Intermediaries Ability to Complete Long Tasks.” arXiv preprint arXiv: in Humanitarian Assistance to Syrian Refugees in Jor- 2503.14499. Korinek, A. 2024c. “The Economics of Transformative dan and Lebanon.” Disasters 43(1): 24–45. AI.” NBER Reporter, National Bureau of Economic Re- Kwon, B., Park, T., Perez-Cruz, F., and Rungcharoen- search, Cambridge, MA. Krakowski, S. 2025. “Human-AI Agency in the Age kitkul, P. 2024. “Large Language Models: A Primer for of Generative AI.” Information and Organization 35(1): Economists.” BIS Quarterly Review 37. Korinek, A., and Stiglitz, J. E. 2018. “Artificial Intelli- 100560. gence and Its Implications for Income Distribution and Kwon, K., Lee, S., and Kim, S. 2022. “AI-Based Home Unemployment.” In Agrawal, A., Gans, J., and Goldfarb, Krakowski, S., Luger, J., and Raisch, S. 2023. “Artificial Energy Management System Considering Energy Ef- A., (eds.), The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An Intelligence and the Changing Sources of Competitive ficiency and Resident Satisfaction.” IEEE Internet of Agenda. University of Chicago Press. Things Journal 9(2): 1608–1621. 242 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Labadze, L., Grigolia, M., and Machaidze, L. 2023. African American Women.” Maternal and child health Lee, G., and Uddin, S. 2023. “The AI Academy: “Role of AI Chatbots in Education: Systematic Literature journal 25: 268–281. Leveraging Education in AI to Unlock Tajikistan’s Review.” International Journal of Educational Technol- Economic Potential.” https://www.gsb.stanford.edu ogy in Higher Education 20(1): 56. Larson, S. M., Snow, C. D., Shirts, M., and Pande, V. S. /faculty-research/case-studies/ai-academy-leveraging 2009. “Folding@ Home and Genome@ Home: Using -education-ai-unlock-tajikistans-economic. Accessed Lacity, M., and Willcocks, L. P. 2017. Robotic Process Distributed Computing to Tackle Previously Intractable 12 December 2024. Automation and Risk Mitigation: The Definitive Guide. Problems in Computational Biology.” arXiv preprint SB Publishing. arXiv:0901.0866. Lee, H.-P. H., Sarkar, A., Tankelevitch, L., Drosos, I., Rintel, S., Banks, R., and Wilson, N. 2025. “The Laffier, J., and Rehman, A. 2023. “Deepfakes and Lauscher, A., and Glavaš, G. 2025. “How Much Do Impact of Generative AI on Critical Thinking: Self- Harm to Women.” Journal of Digital Life and Learning LLMs Hallucinate across Languages? On Multilingual Reported Reductions in Cognitive Effort and Confi- 3(1): 1–21. Estimation of LLM Hallucination in the Wild.” arXiv pre- dence Effects from a Survey of Knowledge Workers.” print arXiv:2502.12769. Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Lafortune, D., Dubé, S., and Lapointe, V. A. 2024. Factors in Computing Systems. Yokohama, Japan: As- “People Are Falling in Love with AI. Should We Wor- Lazar, S. 2024a. “Automatic Authorities: Power and AI.” sociation for Computing Machinery. ry?” Live Science. https://www.livescience.com/health arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05990. /relationships/people-are-falling-in-love-with-ai-should Lee, J. T., and Callaway, D. S. 2018. “The Cost of Re- -we-worry. Accessed 1 April 2025. Lazar, S. 2024b. “Frontier AI Ethics: Anticipating and liability in Decentralized Solar Power Systems in Sub- Evaluating the Societal Impacts of Generative Agents.” Saharan Africa.” Nature Energy 3(11): 960–968. Lai, V., Carton, S., Bhatnagar, R., Liao, Q. V., Zhang, arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06750. Y., and Tan, C. 2022. Human-AI Collaboration Via Con- Lee, K., Miguel, E., and Wolfram, C. 2020a. “Does ditional Delegation: A Case Study of Content Modera- Lazar, S. 2024c. “Legitimacy, Authority, and Demo- Household Electrification Supercharge Economic De- tion. Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Hu- cratic Duties of Explanation.” In Sobel, D., and Wall, S., velopment?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 34(1): man Factors in Computing Systems. New Orleans, LA, (eds.), Oxford Studies in Political Philosophy Volume 10. 122–144. USA: Association for Computing Machinery. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Lee, K., Miguel, E., and Wolfram, C. 2020b. “Experi- Lambert, N., and Brand, F. 2025. “The Latest Open Lazar, S. 2024d. “Power and AI: Nature and Justifica- mental Evidence on the Economics of Rural Electrifica- Artifacts (#7): Alpaca Era of Reasoning Models, Chi- tion.” In Bullock, J. B., Chen, Y.-C., Himmelreich, J., Hud- tion.” Journal of Political Economy 128(4): 1523–1565. na’s Continued Dominance, and Tons of Multimodal son, V. M., Korinek, A., Young, M., and Zhang, B., (eds.), Advancements.” Interconnects [Online]. https://www The Oxford Handbook of AI Governance. Oxford: Ox- Lee, Y. S., Iizuka, T., and Eggleston, K. 2025. “Robots .interconnects.ai/p/artifacts-7. ford University Press. and Labor in Nursing Homes.” Labour Economics 92: 102666. Lancieri, F., Edelson, L., and Bechtold, S. 2024. “AI Lazar, S. 2024e. “Lecture I: Governing the Algorithmic Regulation: Competition, Arbitrage & Regulatory Cap- City.” https://arxiv.org/pdf/2410.20720. Accessed 26 Lehdonvirta, V., Wú, B., and Hawkins, Z. Compute ture.” Center for Law & Economics Working Paper Se- February 2025. North Vs. Compute South: The Uneven Possibilities ries 11. of Compute-Based AI Governance around the Globe. Lazar, S. 2025. “Governing the Algorithmic City.” Phi- Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Eth- Landemore, H. 2012. “Democratic Reason: Politics, losophy & Public Affairs. ics, and Society, 2024. 828–838. Collective Intelligence, and the Rule of the Many.” Lazar, S., and Nelson, A. 2023. “AI Safety on Whose Leins, K., and Kaspersen, A. 2021. “Seven Myths of Landemore, H. 2022. “Can AI Bring Deliberative De- Terms?” Science 381(6654): 138. Using the Term ‘Human on the Loop:’ ‘Just What Do You mocracy to the Masses.” HAI Weekly Seminar, Working Think You Are Doing, Dave?’” Carnegie Council for Eth- Paper. Lazar, S., and Stone, J. 2024. “On the Site of Predic- ics in International Affairs. https://www.carnegiecouncil tive Justice.” Nous 58(3): 730–754. .org/media/article/7-myths-of-using-the-term-human Landers, R. N., and Marin, S. 2021. “Redesigning Job -on-the-loop. Accessed 4 April 2025. Tasks and Work Itself through Workplace Gamification: Lazar, S., Thorburn, L., Jin, T., and Belli, L. 2024. “The A Review, Research Agenda, and Recommendations Moral Case for Using Language Model Agents for Rec- Lembke, A. 2021. Dopamine Nation: Finding Balance for Practice.” Organizational Gamification: 63–89. ommendation.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12123. in the Age of Indulgence. Penguin. Landes, S. D., and Settersten Jr, R. A. 2019. “The In- Lazaridou, A., Gribovskaya, E., Stokowiec, W., and Lenharo, M. 2024. “The Testing of AI in Medicine separability of Human Agency and Linked Lives.” Ad- Grigorev, N. 2022. “Internet-Augmented Language Is a Mess. Here’s How It Should Be Done.” Nature vances in Life Course Research 42. Models through Few-Shot Prompting for Open-Domain 632(8026): 722–724. Question Answering.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05115. Lane, J. N., Leonardi, P. M., Contractor, N. S., and Lenton, T. M., Abrams, J. F., Bartsch, A., Bathiany, S., DeChurch, L. A. 2024. “Teams in the Digital Work- Lazear, E., Shaw, K. L., Hayes, G. E., and Jedras, J. Boulton, C. A., Buxton, J. E., Conversi, A., and others. place: Technology’s Role for Communication, Collabo- M. 2022. “Productivity and Wages: What Was the Pro- 2024. “Remotely Sensing Potential Climate Change ration, and Performance.” Small Group Research 55(1): ductivity-Wage Link in the Digital Revolution of the Past, Tipping Points across Scales.” Nature Communications 139–183. and What Might Occur in the AI Revolution of the Fu- 15(1): 343. ture?” Working Paper 30734, National Bureau of Eco- Lane, M. 2024. Who Will Be the Workers Most Affected nomic Research, Cambridge, MA. Leonard, N. E., and Levin, S. A. 2022. “Collective In- by AI? A Closer Look at the Impact of AI on Women, telligence as a Public Good.” Collective Intelligence 1(1): Low-Skilled Workers and Other Groups. Paris: OECD LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., and Hinton, G. 2015. “Deep 26339137221083293. Publishing. Learning.” Nature 521(7553): 436–444. Lerch, B. 2025. “From Blue- to Steel-Collar Jobs: The Lang, N., Zhukov, L., Zuluaga Martínez, D., Pore, M., Leduc, S., and Liu, Z. 2024. “Automation, Bargaining Decline in Employment Gaps?” American Economic and Cavin, E. 2024. “How CEOs Can Navigate the Power, and Labor Market Fluctuations.” American Eco- Journal: Macroeconomics 17(1): 126–160. New Geopolitics of GenAI.” Boston Consulting Group nomic Journal: Macroeconomics 16(4): 311–349. [Online]. https://www.bcg.com/publications/2024/how Lerner, J. 2013. “The Boulevard of Broken Dreams: -ceos-navigate-new-geopolitics-of-genai. Lee, C.-H., Wang, C., Fan, X., Li, F., and Chen, C.-H. Innovation Policy and Entrepreneurship.” Innovation 2023. “Artificial Intelligence-Enabled Digital Transfor- Policy and the Economy 13(1): 61–82. Lara-Cinisomo, S., Ramirez Olarte, A., Rosales, M., mation in Elderly Healthcare Field: Scoping Review.” and Barrera, A. Z. 2021. “A Systematic Review of Advanced Engineering Informatics 55: 101874. Lerner, J., and Tirole, J. 2002. “Some Simple Econom- Technology-Based Prevention and Treatment Interven- ics of Open Source.” The Journal of Industrial Econom- tions for Perinatal Depression and Anxiety in Latina and ics 50(2): 197–234. REFERENCES 243 Lerner, J., Liu, J., Moscona, J., and Yang, D. Y. 2024. Liang, P., Bommasani, R., Lee, T., Tsipras, D., Soylu, Liu, S., Yao, Y., Jia, J., Casper, S., Baracaldo, N., Hase, “Appropriate Entrepreneurship? The Rise of China and D., Yasunaga, M., Zhang, Y., and others. 2022. “Ho- P., Yao, Y., and others. 2025. “Rethinking Machine Un- the Developing World.” Working Paper 32193, National listic Evaluation of Language Models.” arXiv preprint learning for Large Language Models.” Nature Machine Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. arXiv:2211.09110. Intelligence 7(2): 181–194. Leslie, S.-J., Cimpian, A., Meyer, M., and Freeland, Liang, Y., Sabia, J. J., and Dave, D. M. 2025. “Robots Liu, W., Wu, X., Huang, K., Yan, S., Ma, L., Cao, H., E. 2015. “Expectations of Brilliance Underlie Gender and Crime.” Working Paper 33603, National Bureau of Gan, H., and Tao, F. 2021. “Early Childhood Screen Distributions across Academic Disciplines.” Science Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Time as a Predictor of Emotional and Behavioral Prob- 347(6219): 262–265. lems in Children at 4 Years: A Birth Cohort Study in Licht, H. 2023. “Cross-Lingual Classification of Political China.” Environmental Health and Preventive Medicine Levy, N. 2021. Bad Beliefs: Why They Happen to Good Texts Using Multilingual Sentence Embeddings.” Politi- 26(3): 1–9. People. Oxford University Press. cal Analysis 31(3): 366–379. Liu, X., Liu, H., Yang, G., Jiang, Z., Cui, S., Zhang, Z., Lewandowsky, S., Gignac, G. E., and Oberauer, K. Lim, W. S., Chiu, S.-I., Wu, M.-C., Tsai, S.-F., Wang, Wang, H., and others. 2025. “A Generalist Medical 2013. “The Role of Conspiracist Ideation and World- P.-H., Lin, K.-P., Chen, Y.-M., and others. 2022. “An In- Language Model for Disease Diagnosis Assistance.” views in Predicting Rejection of Science.” Plos one tegrated Biometric Voice and Facial Features for Early Nature Medicine. 8(10): e75637. Detection of Parkinson’s Disease.” NPJ Parkinson’s Dis- ease 8(1): 145. Liu, Y., and Wang, H. 2024. “Who on Earth Is Using Lewandowsky, S., Robertson, R. E., and DiResta, R. Generative AI?” Policy Research Working Group Pa- 2024. “Challenges in Understanding Human-Algorithm Lin, H., Li, R., Liu, Z., Chen, J., Yang, Y., Chen, H., Lin, per 10870, Digital Development Global Practice, World Entanglement During Online Information Consump- Z., and others. 2019. “Diagnostic Efficacy and Thera- Bank, Washington, DC. tion.” Perspectives on Psychological Science 19(5): peutic Decision-Making Capacity of an Artificial Intel- 758–766. ligence Platform for Childhood Cataracts in Eye Clinics: Liu, Y., Wang, H., and Zhenwhei Qiang, C. 2024. A Multicentre Randomized Controlled Trial.” EClini- “Who on Earth Is Using Generative AI?” https://blogs Lewis, M., Cahill, A., Madnani, N., and Evans, J. calMedicine 9: 52–59. .worldbank.org/en/digital-development/who-on-earth 2023. “Local Similarity and Global Variability Charac- -is-using-generative-ai-. Accessed 11 March 2025. terize the Semantic Space of Human Languages.” Pro- Linda Morris, O. A. 2022. “Holding Facebook Ac- ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120(51): countable for Digital Redlining.” ACLU. https://www Liu, Z., Wang, Y., Vaidya, S., Ruehle, F., Halverson, J., e2300986120. .aclu.org/news/privacy-technology/holding-facebook Soljačić, M., Hou, T. Y., and Tegmark, M. 2024c. “Kan: -accountable-for-digital-redlining. Accessed 4 May Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks.” arXiv preprint arXiv: Li, H., and Aral, S. 2025. “Human Trust in AI Search: 2025. 2404.19756. A Large-Scale Experiment.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2504 .06435. Lipowski, C., Salomons, A., and Zierahn-Weilage, Llanes-Ortiz, G. 2023. Digital Initiatives for Indigenous U. 2024. “Expertise at Work: New Technologies, New Languages. UNESCO and Global Voices. Li, H., and Zhang, R. 2024. “Finding Love in Algo- Skills, and Worker Impacts.” ZEW Discussion Papers rithms: Deciphering the Emotional Contexts of Close 24, Zentrum für Europäische Wirtschaftsforschung, Loeckx, J. 2016. “Blurring Boundaries in Education: Encounters with AI Chatbots.” Journal of Computer- Mannheim, Germany. Context and Impact of Moocs.” International Review Mediated Communication 29(5). of Research in Open and Distributed Learning 17(3): Lippens, L. 2024. “Computer Says ‘No’: Exploring 92–121. Li, H., Chen, X., XU, Z., Li, D., Hu, N., Teng, F., Li, Systemic Bias in ChatGPT Using an Audit Approach.” Y., and others. 2025. “Exposing Numeracy Gaps: A Computers in Human Behavior: Artificial Humans 2(1): Lorenz, J., Rauhut, H., Schweitzer, F., and Helbing, Benchmark to Evaluate Fundamental Numerical Abili- 100054. D. 2011. “How Social Influence Can Undermine the ties in Large Language Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv: Wisdom of Crowd Effect.” Proceedings of the National 2502.11075. Liu, C.-F., Huang, C.-C., Wang, J.-J., Kuo, K.-M., and Academy of Sciences 108(22): 9020–9025. Chen, C.-J. 2021. “The Critical Factors Affecting the De- Li, K., Rubungo, A. N., Lei, X., Persaud, D., Choudhary, ployment and Scaling of Healthcare AI: Viewpoint from Lorenz-Spreen, P., Oswald, L., Lewandowsky, S., and K., DeCost, B., Dieng, A. B., and Hattrick-Simpers, J. an Experienced Medical Center. Healthcare.” MDPI, 685. Hertwig, R. 2023. “A Systematic Review of Worldwide 2025. “Probing out-of-Distribution Generalization in Causal and Correlational Evidence on Digital Media Machine Learning for Materials.” Communications Ma- Liu, H., Ding, N., Li, X., Chen, Y., Sun, H., Huang, and Democracy.” Nature Human Behaviour 7(1): 74–101. terials 6(1): 9. Y., Liu, C., and others. 2024. “Artificial Intelligence and Radiologist Burnout.” JAMA Network Open 7(11): Loveys, K., Prina, M., Axford, C., Domènec, Ò. R., Li, L., Xu, W., Guo, J., Zhao, R., Li, X., Yuan, Y., Zhang, e2448714–e2448714. Weng, W., Broadbent, E., Pujari, S., and others. B., and others. 2024. “Chain of Ideas: Revolutioniz- 2022. “Artificial Intelligence for Older People Receiv- ing Research Via Novel Idea Development with LLM Liu, H., Zhou, Y., Li, M., Yuan, C., and Tan, C. 2024a. ing Long-Term Care: A Systematic Review of Accept- Agents.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.13185. “Literature Meets Data: A Synergistic Approach to Hy- ability and Effectiveness Studies.” The Lancet Healthy pothesis Generation.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.17309. Longevity 3(4): e286-e297. Li, R., Kamaraj, A., Ma, J., and Ebling, S. 2024. “De- coding Ableism in Large Language Models: An Inter- Liu, L. T., Wang, S., Britton, T., and Abebe, R. 2023. Lu, M. Y., Chen, B., Williamson, D. F. K., Chen, R. J., sectional Approach.” Proceedings of the Third Work- “Reimagining the Machine Learning Life Cycle to Im- Zhao, M., Chow, A. K., Ikemura, K., and others. 2024. shop on NLP for Positive Impact, 232–249. prove Educational Outcomes of Students.” Proceed- “A Multimodal Generative AI Copilot for Human Pathol- ings of the National Academy of Sciences 120(9): ogy.” Nature 634(8033): 466–473. Li, X., Ren, A., and Li, Q. 2022. “Exploring Patterns of e2204781120. Transportation-Related Co2 Emissions Using Machine Lu, P., Peng, B., Cheng, H., Galley, M., Chang, K.-W., Learning Methods.” Sustainability 14(8): 4588. Liu, L., Zhou, W., Guan, K., Peng, B., Xu, S., Tang, Wu, Y. N., Zhu, S.-C., and Gao, J. 2023. “Chameleon: J., Zhu, Q., and others. 2024b. “Knowledge-Guided Plug-and-Play Compositional Reasoning with Large Li, Y., Du, Y., Zhou, K., Wang, J., Zhao, W. X., and Machine Learning Can Improve Carbon Cycle Quanti- Language Models.” Advances in Neural Information Wen, J.-R. 2023. “Evaluating Object Hallucination in fication in Agroecosystems.” Nature Communications Processing Systems 36: 43447–43478. Large Vision-Language Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv: 15(1): 357. 2305.10355. Lucas, J. W., and Villarroel, M. A. 2022. “Telemedicine Liu, R., Geng, J., Wu, A. J., Sucholutsky, I., Lombro- Use among Adults: United States.” NCHS Data Brief Li, Y., Liu, K., Satapathy, R., Wang, S., and Cambria, zo, T., and Griffiths, T. L. 2024b. “Mind Your Step (by 445. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Sta- E. 2024. “Recent Developments in Recommender Sys- Step): Chain-of-Thought Can Reduce Performance on tistics. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/databriefs tems: A Survey [Review Article].” IEEE Computational Tasks Where Thinking Makes Humans Worse.” arXiv /db445.htm. Accessed 17 January 2025. Intelligence Magazine 19(2): 78–95. preprint arXiv:2410.21333. 244 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Luccioni, A. S., Strubell, E., and Crawford, K. 2025. Psychology Research and Behavior Management 18: Sustainable Crop Yields: Deep Learning and Explain- “From Efficiency Gains to Rebound Effects: The Prob- 151–167. able AI Tools.” Sustainability 16(21): 9437. lem of Jevons’ Paradox in AI’s Polarized Environmental Debate.” Ma, Z., Jiang, G., Hu, Y., and Chen, J. 2025. “A Review Maleki, N., Padmanabhan, B., and Dutta, K. 2024. of Physics-Informed Machine Learning for Building En- “AI Hallucinations: A Misnomer Worth Clarifying.” 2024 Lucidity Insights. 2024. “Global AI Investment Flows ergy Modeling.” Applied Energy 381: 125169. IEEE Conference on Artificial Intelligence (CAI), 25–27 in 2024.” June: 133–138. Machajewski, S. 2024. “The AI Revolution in Chess Ludwig, J., and Mullainathan, S. 2024. “Machine and Its Impact on Education.” ED Tech Digest [Online]. Mankoff, J., Hayes, G. R., and Kasnitz, D. 2010. “Dis- Learning as a Tool for Hypothesis Generation.” The https://www.edtechdigest.com/2024/11/15/the-ai ability Studies as a Source of Critical Inquiry for the Quarterly Journal of Economics 139(2): 751–827. -revolution-in-chess-and-its-impact-on-education/. Field of Assistive Technology.” Proceedings of the 12th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Com- Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., and Rambachan, A. Mack, K. A., Qadri, R., Denton, R., Kane, S. K., and puters and Accessibility, 3–10. 2024. “The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Algorithms.” Bennett, C. L. 2024. “‘They Only Care to Show Us the AEA Papers and Proceedings 114: 623–27. Wheelchair:’ Disability Representation in Text-to-Image Mann, R. P. 2021. “Collective Decision-Making under AI Models.” Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference Changing Social Environments among Agents Adapted Ludwig, J., Mullainathan, S., and Rambachan, A. on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–23. to Sparse Connectivity.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.13543. 2025. “Large Language Models: An Applied Econo- metric Framework.” Working Paper 33344, National Bu- MacKay, A., and Weinstein, S. N. 2022. “Dynamic Mann, R. P. 2022. “Collective Decision-Making under reau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Pricing Algorithms, Consumer Harm, and Regulatory Changing Social Environments among Agents Adapt- Response.” Washington University Law Review 100: 111. ed to Sparse Connectivity.” Collective Intelligence 1(2): Lu-Hai Liang. 2019. “‘They’re More Attractive Than 26339137221121347. Real Boyfriends:’ Inside the Weird World of Chinese Mackay, C. 1980. Extraordinary Popular Delusions and Romance Video Games.” https://www.wired.com/story the Madness of Crowds. New York: Harmony Books. Mannheim, I., Wouters, E. J., Köttl, H., Van Boekel, /china-love-games/. Accessed 28 March 2024. L. C., Brankaert, R., and Van Zaalen, Y. 2023. “Age- Mackenzie, C. 2014. “Three Dimensions of Autonomy: ism in the Discourse and Practice of Designing Digital Lukianoff, G., and Haidt, J. 2019. The Coddling of the A Relational Analysis.” Autonomy, Oppression and Technology for Older Persons: A Scoping Review.” The American Mind: How Good Intentions and Bad Ideas Gender. Oxford University Press. Gerontologist 63(7): 1188–1200. Are Setting up a Generation for Failure. Penguin. Mackenzie, C., and Stoljar, N. 2000. Relational Au- Manning, B. S., Zhu, K., and Horton, J. J. 2024. “Au- Lukoff, K., Lyngs, U., Zade, H., Liao, J. V., Choi, J., tonomy: Feminist Perspectives on Automony, Agency, tomated Social Science: Language Models as Scientist Fan, K., Munson, S. A., and Hiniker, A. 2021. “How the and the Social Self. Oxford University Press. and Subjects.” Working Paper 32381, National Bureau Design of Youtube Influences User Sense of Agency.” of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human MacKenzie, D. 1999. The Social Shaping of Technol- Factors in Computing Systems. Yokohama, Japan: As- ogy. Berkshire, UK: Open University Press. Mannuru, N. R., Shahriar, S., Teel, Z. A., Wang, T., Lund, sociation for Computing Machinery. B. D., Tijani, S., Pohboon, C. O., and others. 2023. “Ar- MacLeavy, J. 2021. “Care Work, Gender Inequality and tificial Intelligence in Developing Countries: The Impact Lum, K., and Isaac, W. 2016. “To Predict and Serve?” Technological Advancement in the Age of Covid-19.” of Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI) Technologies for Significance 13(5): 14–19. Gender, Work & Organization 28(1): 138–154. Development.” Information Development: 1–19. Lundstedt, M., Wiebrecht, F., Boese-Schlosser, V., Macro Polo. 2024. “The Global AI Talent Tracker Manyika, J., and Spence, M. 2023. “The Coming AI Morrison, K., Natsika, N., Nord, M., Papada, E., and 2.0.” https://archivemacropolo.org/interactive/digital Economic Revolution: Can Artificial Intelligence Reverse others. 2022. “Case for Democracy Report.” V-Dem -projects/the-global-ai-talent-tracker/. Accessed April the Productivity Slowdown?” Foreign Affairs 102: 70. Institute. 2025. Maples, B., Cerit, M., Vishwanath, A., and Pea, R. Luo, X., Deng, Z., Yang, B., and Luo, M. Y. 2024. “Pre- Madary, M. 2022. “The Illusion of Agency in Human– 2024. “Loneliness and Suicide Mitigation for Students Trained Language Models in Medicine: A Survey.” Arti- Computer Interaction.” Neuroethics 15(16). Using GPT3-Enabled Chatbots.” NPJ Mental Health Re- ficial Intelligence in Medicine 154: 102904. search 3(4): 1–6. Madhavaram, C. R., Sunkara, J. R., Kuraku, C., Galla, Luo, X., Rechardt, A., Sun, G., Nejad, K. K., Yáñez, E. P., and Gollangi, H. K. 2024. “The Future of Auto- Maragno, G., Tangi, L., Gastaldi, L., and Benedetti, F., Yilmaz, B., Lee, K., and others. 2024. “Large Lan- motive Manufacturing: Integrating AI, Ml, and Genera- M. 2023. “Exploring the Factors, Affordances and Con- guage Models Surpass Human Experts in Predicting tive AI for Next-Gen Automatic Cars.” IMRJR 1(1). straints Outlining the Implementation of Artificial Intel- Neuroscience Results.” Nature Human Behaviour. ligence in Public Sector Organizations.” International Madianou, M. 2019. “Technocolonialism: Digital In- Journal of Information Management 73: 102686. Lutz, W., Reiter, C., Özdemir, C., Yildiz, D., Guima- novation and Data Practices in the Humanitarian Re- raes, R., and Goujon, A. 2021. “Skills-Adjusted Human sponse to Refugee Crises.” Social Media + Society 5(3): Marcenaro-Gutierrez, O. D., Micklewright, J., and Vi- Capital Shows Rising Global Gap.” Proceedings of the 2056305119863146. gnoles, A. F. 2021. “Social Mobility and the Importance National Academy of Sciences 118(7): e2015826118. of Networks: Evidence for Britain.” SSRN Electronic Magesh, S. 2025. “A Convolutional Neural Network Journal. Lyell, D., and Coiera, E. 2017. “Automation Bias and Model and Algorithm Driven Prototype for Sustainable Verification Complexity: A Systematic Review.” Journal Tilling and Fertilizer Optimization.” NPJ Sustainable Ag- Marcinkowski, F., Kieslich, K., Starke, C., and Lünich, of the American Medical Informatics Association 24(2): riculture 3(1): 1–15. M. 2020. “Implications of AI (Un-)Fairness in Higher Ed- 423–431. ucation Admissions: The Effects of Perceived AI (Un-) Magnani, M., and Clindaniel, J. 2023. “Artificial Intel- Fairness on Exit, Voice, and Organizational Reputation.” M. Bran, A., Cox, S., Schilter, O., Baldassari, C., ligence and Archaeological Illustration.” Advances in Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Fairness, Ac- White, A. D., and Schwaller, P. 2024. “Augmenting Archaeological Practice 11(4): 452–460. countability, and Transparency, ACM Press, 122–130. Large Language Models with Chemistry Tools.” Nature Machine Intelligence 6(5): 525–535. Makovi, K., Sargsyan, A., Li, W., Bonnefon, J.-F., and Marcus, G. 2023. “‘Math Is Hard’—If You Are an LLM— Rahwan, T. 2023. “Trust within Human-Machine Collec- and Why That Matters.” Marcus on AI [Online]. https:// Ma, G., Tian, S., Song, Y., Chen, Y., Shi, H., and Li, tives Depends on the Perceived Consensus About Co- garymarcus.substack.com/p/math-is-hard-if-you-are-an J. 2025. “When Technology Meets Anxiety:The Mod- operative Norms.” Nature Communications 14(1): 3108. -llm-and. erating Role of AI Usage in the Relationship between Social Anxiety, Learning Adaptability, and Behavioral Malashin, I., Tynchenko, V., Gantimurov, A., Nelyub, Marcus, G. F. 2024. Taming Silicon Valley: How We Problems among Chinese Primary School Students.” V., Borodulin, A., and Tynchenko, Y. 2024. “Predicting Can Ensure That AI Works for Us. MIT Press. REFERENCES 245 Mariadassou, S., Klesse, A.-K., and Boegershausen, Mashhadi Rajabi, M. 2022. “Dilemmas of Energy Ef- McComb, C. A., Vanman, E. J., and Tobin, S. J. 2023. J. 2024. “Averse to What: Consumer Aversion to Algo- ficiency: A Systematic Review of the Rebound Effect “A Meta-Analysis of the Effects of Social Media Expo- rithmic Labels, but Not Their Outputs?” Current Opinion and Attempts to Curb Energy Consumption.” Energy sure to Upward Comparison Targets on Self-Evalua- in Psychology 58: 101839. Research & Social Science 89: 102661. tions and Emotions.” Media Psychology 26(5): 612–635. Mariano, J., Marques, S., Ramos, M. R., and de Vries, Maslej, N., Fattorini, L., Brynjolfsson, E., Etchemendy, McCosker, A., Yao, X., Albury, K., Maddox, A., H. 2021. “Internet Use by Middle-Aged and Older J., Ligett, K., Lyons, T., Manyika, J., and others. 2023. Farmer, J., and Stoyanovich, J. 2022. “Develop- Adults: Longitudinal Relationships with Functional Abil- The AI Index 2023: Annual Report. AI Index Steering ing Data Capability with Non-Profit Organisations Us- ity, Social Support, and Self-Perceptions of Aging.” Psy- Committee, Stanford Institute for Human-Centered Arti- ing Participatory Methods.” Big Data & Society 9(1): chology and Aging 36(8): 983–995. ficial Intelligence, Stanford University. 20539517221099882. Mariano, J., Marques, S., Ramos, M. R., Gerardo, F., Materials Project. 2024. “Materials Project.” https:// McCowan, B., Hubbard, J., Walker, L., Sharpe, F., Fre- Cunha, C. L. d., Girenko, A., Alexandersson, J., and next-gen.materialsproject.org/. Accessed 11 March diani, J., and Doyle, L. 2023. “Interactive Bioacoustic others. 2022. “Too Old for Technology? Stereotype 2205. Playback as a Tool for Detecting and Exploring Nonhu- Threat and Technology Use by Older Adults.” Behav- man Intelligence: “Conversing” with an Alaskan Hump- iour & Information Technology 41(7): 1503–1514. Mathuros, K., Venugopalan, S., and Adepu, S. 2024. back Whale.” PeerJ 11: e16349. “WAXAI: Explainable Anomaly Detection in Industrial Marinoudi, V., Benos, L., Villa, C. C., Kateris, D., Ber- Control Systems and Water Systems.” Proceedings of McCoy, R. T., Yao, S., Friedman, D., Hardy, M. D., and ruto, R., Pearson, S., Sørensen, C. G., and Bochtis, D. the 10th ACM Cyber-Physical System Security Work- Griffiths, T. L. 2024. “Embers of Autoregression Show 2024. “Large Language Models Impact on Agricultural shop. Singapore: Association for Computing Machinery. How Large Language Models Are Shaped by the Prob- Workforce Dynamics: Opportunity or Risk?” Smart Agri- lem They Are Trained to Solve.” Proceedings of the cultural Technology 9: 100677. Matthes, J., Karsay, K., Schmuck, D., and Stevic, A. National Academy of Sciences 121(41): e2322420121. 2020. “‘Too Much to Handle:’ Impact of Mobile Social Markel, J. M., Opferman, S. G., Landay, J. A., and Networking Sites on Information Overload, Depressive McCulloch, W. S., and Pitts, W. 1943. “A Logical Cal- Piech, C. 2023. “GPTeach: Interactive TA Training with Symptoms, and Well-Being.” Computers in Human Be- culus of the Ideas Immanent in Nervous Activity.” The GPT-Based Students.” Proceedings of the Tenth ACM havior 105: 106217. Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics 5: 115–133. Conference on Learning @ Scale. Copenhagen: Asso- ciation for Computing Machinery. Maturana, H., and F. Varela. 1987. The Tree of Knowl- McCullough, E. B. 2025. “Structural Transformation edge: The Biological Roots of Human Understanding. without Industrialization? Evidence from Tanzanian Markowitz, D. M. 2024. “From Complexity to Clarity: Boston, MA: Shambhala. Consumers.” American Journal of Agricultural Econom- How AI Enhances Perceptions of Scientists and the ics 107(2): 411–439. Public’s Understanding of Science.” PNAS Nexus 3(9). Matz, S. C., Teeny, J. D., Vaid, S. S., Peters, H., Harari, G. M., and Cerf, M. 2024. “The Potential of Genera- McDonald, D., Papadopoulos, R., and Benningfield, Marriott, H. R., and Pitardi, V. 2024. “One Is the Lone- tive AI for Personalized Persuasion at Scale.” Scientific L. 2024. “Reducing LLM Hallucination Using Knowl- liest Number… Two Can Be as Bad as One: The Influ- Reports 14(1): 4692. edge Distillation: A Case Study with Mistral Large and ence of AI Friendship Apps on Users’ Well-Being and MMLU Benchmark.” Authorea Preprints. Addiction.” Psychology & Marketing 41(1): 86–101. Mayer, H., Yee, L., Chui, M., and Roberts, R. 2025. Superagency in the Workplace: Empowering People to McDonald, N., Massey, A., and Hamidi, F. 2023. Marsh, E., Vallejos, E. P., and Spence, A. 2022. “The Unlock AI’s Full Potential. McKinsey & Company. “Elicitation and Empathy with AI-Enhanced Adaptive Digital Workplace and Its Dark Side: An Integrative Re- Assistive Technologies (AATs): Towards Sustainable In- view.” Computers in Human Behavior 128: 107118. Mayer, R. E., and DaPra, C. S. 2012. “An Embodiment clusive Design Method Education.” Journal of Problem Effect in Computer-Based Learning with Animated Ped- Based Learning in Higher Education 11(2): 78–99. Marti, L., Wu, S., Piantadosi, S. T., and Kidd, C. 2023. agogical Agents.” Journal of Experimental Psychology: “Latent Diversity in Human Concepts.” Open Mind 7: Applied 18(3): 239. McElheran, K., Li, J. F., Brynjolfsson, E., Kroff, Z., Din- 79–92. lersoz, E., Foster, L., and Zolas, N. 2024. “AI Adoption Mayfield, H., Smith, C., Gallagher, M., and Hockings, in America: Who, What, and Where.” Journal of Eco- Martin, A. J., Wellen, J. M., and Grimmer, M. R. 2016. M. 2017. “Use of Freely Available Datasets and Ma- nomics & Management Strategy 33(2): 375–415. “An Eye on Your Work: How Empowerment Affects chine Learning Methods in Predicting Deforestation.” the Relationship between Electronic Surveillance and Environmental Modelling & Software 87: 17–28. McGovern, A., Demuth, J., Bostrom, A., Wirz, C. D., Counterproductive Work Behaviours.” The Interna- Tissot, P. E., Cains, M. G., and Musgrave, K. D. 2024. tional Journal of Human Resource Management 27(21): Mayor, A. 2018. Gods and Robots: Myths, Machines, “The Value of Convergence Research for Developing 2635–2651. and Ancient Dreams of Technology. Princeton, NJ: Trustworthy AI for Weather, Climate, and Ocean Haz- Princeton University Press. ards.” NPJ Natural Hazards 1(1): 13. Martínez, G., Watson, L., Reviriego, P., Hernández, J. A., Juarez, M., and Sarkar, R. 2024. Towards Un- Mazeika, M., Yin, X., Tamirisa, R., Lim, J., Lee, B. W., McGrath, T., Kapishnikov, A., Tomašev, N., Pearce, derstanding the Interplay of Generative Artificial Intel- Ren, R., Phan, L., and others. 2025. “Utility Engineer- A., Wattenberg, M., Hassabis, D., Kim, B., Paquet, U., ligence and the Internet. Cham: Springer Nature Swit- ing: Analyzing and Controlling Emergent Value Sys- and Kramnik, V. 2022. “Acquisition of Chess Knowl- zerland, 59–73. tems in AIs.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08640. edge in Alphazero.” Proceedings of the National Acad- emy of Sciences 119(47): e2206625119. Martins-Neto, A., Mathew, N., Mohnen, P., and Treibi- McArthur, B. A., Tough, S., and Madigan, S. 2022. ch, T. 2023. “Is There Job Polarization in Developing “Screen Time and Developmental and Behavioral McGreivy, N., and Hakim, A. 2024. “Weak Baselines Economies? A Review and Outlook.” The World Bank Outcomes for Preschool Children.” Pediatric Research and Reporting Biases Lead to Overoptimism in Machine Research Observer 39(2): 259–288. 91(6): 1616–1621. Learning for Fluid-Related Partial Differential Equa- tions.” Nature Machine Intelligence 6(10): 1256–1269. Marwala, T. 2024. “Avoidable and Unavoidable AI Al- McCarthy, J., Minsky, M. L., Rochester, N., and Shan- gorithmic Bias.” The Balancing Problem in the Gover- non, C. E. 2006. “A Proposal for the Dartmouth Sum- McHarg, G., Ribner, A. D., Devine, R. T., and Hughes, nance of Artificial Intelligence. Springer. mer Research Project on Artificial Intelligence, August C. 2020. “Screen Time and Executive Function in Tod- 31, 1955.” AI Magazine 27(4): 12. dlerhood: A Longitudinal Study.” Frontiers in Psychol- Masello, L., Castignani, G., Sheehan, B., Murphy, F., ogy 11: 570392. and McDonnell, K. 2022. “On the Road Safety Bene- McClure, E. C., Sievers, M., Brown, C. J., Buelow, C. fits of Advanced Driver Assistance Systems in Different A., Ditria, E. M., Hayes, M. A., Pearson, R. M., and McIntosh, T. R., Liu, T., Susnjak, T., Watters, P., Ng, Driving Contexts.” Transportation Research Interdisci- others. 2020. “Artificial Intelligence Meets Citizen Sci- A., and Halgamuge, M. N. 2024. “A Culturally Sensi- plinary Perspectives 15: 100670. ence to Supercharge Ecological Monitoring.” Patterns tive Test to Evaluate Nuanced GPT Hallucination.” IEEE 1(7). Transactions on Artificial Intelligence 5(6): 2739–2751. 246 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 McIntosh, T. R., Susnjak, T., Arachchilage, N., Liu, Messeri, L., and Crockett, M. J. 2024. “Artificial Intel- Mitchell, M. 2024a. “Debates on the Nature of Artificial T., Watters, P., and Halgamuge, M. N. 2024. “Inad- ligence and Illusions of Understanding in Scientific Re- General Intelligence.” Science 383(6689): eado7069. equacies of Large Language Model Benchmarks in the search.” Nature 627(8002): 49–58. Era of Generative Artificial Intelligence.” arXiv preprint Mitchell, M. 2024b. “The Metaphors of Artificial Intel- arXiv:2402.09880. Methnani, L., Chiou, M., Dignum, V., and Theodorou, ligence.” Science 386(6723): eadt6140. A. 2024. “Who’s in Charge Here? A Survey on Trust- McKay, S., and Tenove, C. 2021. “Disinformation as a worthy AI in Variable Autonomy Robotic Systems.” ACM Mitchell, M. 2025. “Artificial Intelligence Learns to Rea- Threat to Deliberative Democracy.” Political Research Computing Surveys 56(7): Article 184. son.” Science 387(6740): eadw5211. Quarterly 74(3): 703–717. Meza-Cordero, J. A. 2017. “Learn to Play and Play to Mitchell, M., and Krakauer, D. C. 2023. “The Debate McKinsey Analytics. 2021. “The State of AI in 2021.” Learn: Evaluation of the One Laptop Per Child Program over Understanding in AI’s Large Language Models.” Mckinsey & Company. in Costa Rica.” Journal of International Development Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 29(1): 3–31. 120(13): e2215907120. McLoughlin, K. L., and Brady, W. J. 2023. “Human- Algorithm Interactions Help Explain the Spread of Mis- Mhasawade, V., Zhao, Y., and Chunara, R. 2021. “Ma- Mitchell, S., Potash, E., Barocas, S., D’Amour, A., and information.” Current Opinion in Psychology: 101770. chine Learning and Algorithmic Fairness in Public and Lum, K. 2021. “Algorithmic Fairness: Choices, Assump- Population Health.” Nature Machine Intelligence 3(8): tions, and Definitions.” Annual Review of Statistics and Mehandru, N., Hall, A. K., Melnichenko, O., Dubinina, 659–666. Its Application 8: 141–163. Y., Tsirulnikov, D., Bamman, D., Alaa, A., Saponas, S., and Malladi, V. S. 2025. “Bioagents: Democratiz- Mienye, I. D., Swart, T. G., and Obaido, G. 2024. “Fair- Mittelstadt, B., Russell, C., and Wachter, S. 2019. “Ex- ing Bioinformatics Analysis with Multi-Agent Systems.” ness Metrics in AI Healthcare Applications: A Review.” plaining Explanations in AI.” Proceedings of the Confer- arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.06314. Presented at the 2024 IEEE International Conference ence on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. on Information Reuse and Integration for Data Science Atlanta, GA: Association for Computing Machinery. Mei, K., Fereidooni, S., and Caliskan, A. 2023. “Bias (IRI), 7–9 August. against 93 Stigmatized Groups in Masked Language Mitzner, T. L., Fausset, C. B., Boron, J. B., Adams, A. Models and Downstream Sentiment Classification Mifsud, J. C. O., Lytras, S., Oliver, M. R., Toon, K., Cos- E., Dijkstra, K., Lee, C. C., Rogers, W. A., and Fisk, Tasks.” Proceedings of the 2023 ACM Conference on ta, V. A., Holmes, E. C., and Grove, J. 2024. “Mapping A. D. 2008. “Older Adults’ Training Preferences for Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, 1699–1710. Glycoprotein Structure Reveals Flaviviridae Evolution- Learning to Use Technology.” Proceedings of the Hu- ary History.” Nature 633(8030): 695–703. man Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting Mei, Q., Xie, Y., Yuan, W., and Jackson, M. O. 2024. 52(26): 2047–2051. “A Turing Test of Whether AI Chatbots Are Behaviorally Milani, S., Topin, N., Veloso, M., and Fang, F. 2024. Similar to Humans.” Proceedings of the National Acad- “Explainable Reinforcement Learning: A Survey and Mlonyeni, P. M. T. 2024. “Personal AI, Deception, and emy of Sciences 121(9): e2313925121. Comparative Review.” ACM Computing Surveys 56(7): the Problem of Emotional Bubbles.” AI & Society 40(3): 1–36. 1927–1938. Meijer, A., Lorenz, L., and Wessels, M. 2021. “Algo- rithmization of Bureaucratic Organizations: Using a Milano, S., and Prunkl, C. 2025. “Algorithmic Profiling Mokyr, J. 2016. A Culture of Growth. Princeton, NJ: Practice Lens to Study How Context Shapes Predictive as a Source of Hermeneutical Injustice.” Philosophical Princeton University Press. Policing Systems.” Public Administration Review 81(5): Studies 182(1): 185–203. 837–846. Molenaar, I. 2022. “Towards Hybrid Human-AI Learn- Minaee, S., Mikolov, T., Nikzad, N., Chenaghlu, M., ing Technologies.” European Journal of Education Meinke, A., Schoen, B., Scheurer, J., Balesni, M., Socher, R., Amatriain, X., and Gao, J. 2024. “Large 57(4): 632–645. Shah, R., and Hobbhahn, M. 2024. “Frontier Models Language Models: A Survey, 2024.” arXiv preprint Are Capable of In-Context Scheming.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.06196. Mollick, E., and Mollick, L. 2023. “Assigning AI: Seven arXiv:2412.04984. Approaches for Students, with Prompts.” arXiv preprint Mirdita, M., Schütze, K., Moriwaki, Y., Heo, L., arXiv:2306.10052. Mejia, D. G., J. D. 2025. “Artificial Intelligence (AI) at Ovchinnikov, S., and Steinegger, M. 2022. “Colab- the Service of Financial Inclusion.” https://www.caf fold: Making Protein Folding Accessible to All.” Nature Mollick, E., Mollick, L., Bach, N., Ciccarelli, L., .com/en/blog/artificial-intelligence-ai-at-the-service-of Methods 19(6): 679–682. Przystanski, B., and Ravipinto, D. 2024. “AI Agents -financial-inclusion/. Accessed 2 April 2025. and Education: Simulated Practice at Scale.” arXiv pre- Miri, B., David, B.-C., and Uri, Z. 2007. “Purposely print arXiv:2407.12796. Mejias, U. A., and Couldry, N. 2024. “Data Grab: The Teaching for the Promotion of Higher-Order Thinking New Colonialism of Big Tech and How to Fight Back.” Skills: A Case of Critical Thinking.” Research in Science Montévil, M., and M. Mossio. 2015. “Biological Data Grab. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. Education 37: 353–369. Organisation as Closure of Constraints.” Journal of Theoretical Biology 372: 179–91. http://dx.doi.org/10 Melis, S., and Apthorpe, R. 2020. “The Politics of the Mirza, V., Kulkarni, R., and Jadhav, A. 2024. “Evaluat- .1016/j.jtbi.2015.02.029. Multi-Local in Disaster Governance.” Politics and Gov- ing Gender, Racial, and Age Biases in Large Language ernance 8(4): 366–374. Models: A Comparative Analysis of Occupational and Moor, M., Banerjee, O., Abad, Z. S. H., Krumholz, H. Crime Scenarios.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14583. M., Leskovec, J., Topol, E. J., and Rajpurkar, P. 2023. Melumad, S., and Yun, J. H. 2025. “Experimental Evi- “Foundation Models for Generalist Medical Artificial In- dence of the Effects of Large Language Models Versus Mishra, S., Koopman, R., De Prato, G., Rao, A., Oso- telligence.” Nature 616(7956): 259–265. Web Search on Depth of Learning.” Available at SSRN rio-Rodarte, I., Kim, J., Spatafora, N., Strier, K., and 5104064. Zaccaria, A. 2023. “AI Specialization for Pathways Moreno, A., and M. Mossio. 2015. Biological Auton- of Economic Diversification.” Scientific Reports 13(1): omy: A Philosophical and Theoretical Enquiry. Dor- Meng, X.-L. 2024. “AI Has Won Nobel Prizes in Hard 19475. drecht, Netherlands: Springer. Science: Can Humans Be Smarter—and Softer on Each Other?” Harvard Data Science Review 6(4). Mitchell, M. 2021. “Why AI Is Harder Than We Think.” Morice, C. P., Kennedy, J. J., Rayner, N. A., Winn, J. Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Compu- P., Hogan, E., Killick, R. E., Dunn, R. J. H., and others. Merchant, A., Batzner, S., Schoenholz, S. S., Aykol, tation Conference. Lille, France: Association for Com- 2021. “An Updated Assessment of near-Surface Tem- M., Cheon, G., and Cubuk, E. D. 2023. “Scaling Deep puting Machinery. perature Change from 1850: The Hadcrut5 Data Set.” Learning for Materials Discovery.” Nature 624(7990): Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 126(3): 80–85. Mitchell, M. 2023a. “AI’s Challenge of Understanding e2019JD032361. the World.” Science 382(6671): eadm8175. Merola, R. 2022. “Inclusive Growth in the Era of Auto- Mortazavi, B. 2025. “Recent Advances in Machine mation and AI: How Can Taxation Help?” Frontiers in Mitchell, M. 2023b. “How Do We Know How Smart AI Learning-Assisted Multiscale Design of Energy Materi- Artificial Intelligence 5: 867832. Systems Are?” Science 381(6654): eadj5957. als.” Advanced Energy Materials forthcoming. REFERENCES 247 Moruzzi, C. 2025. “Artificial Intelligence and Creativity.” Müller, V. C., and Bostrom, N. 2016. “Future Progress Napp, C., and Breda, T. 2022. “The Stereotype That Philosophy Compass 20(3): e70030. in Artificial Intelligence: A Survey of Expert Opinion.” In Girls Lack Talent: A Worldwide Investigation.” Science Müller, V. C., (ed.), Fundamental Issues of Artificial Intel- Advances 8(10): eabm3689. Moss, A. J., Rosenzweig, C., Robinson, J., Jaffe, S. ligence. Cham: Springer International Publishing. N., and Litman, L. 2023. “Is It Ethical to Use Mechani- Narasimhan, S. 2021. “Participation of Women in Sci- cal Turk for Behavioral Research? Relevant Data from a Mumuni, F., and Mumuni, A. 2025. “Explainable Ar- ence in the Developed and Developing Worlds: Invert- Representative Survey of MTurk Participants and Wag- tificial Intelligence (XAI): From Inherent Explainability ed U of Feminization of the Scientific Workforce, Gen- es.” Behavior Research Methods 55(8): 4048–4067. to Large Language Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501 der Equity and Retention.” Pure and Applied Chemistry .09967. 93(8): 913–925. Mou, C., Liang, A., Hu, C., Meng, F., Han, B., and Xu, F. 2023. “Monitoring Endangered and Rare Wildlife in Munusamy, N., and Vairavasundaram, I. 2024. “AI Narayanan, A. 2023. “Understanding Social Media the Field: A Foundation Deep Learning Model Integrat- and Machine Learning in V2g Technology: A Review Recommendation Algorithms.” Knight First Amendment ing Human Knowledge for Incremental Recognition of Bi-Directional Converters, Charging Systems, and Institute at Columbia University. with Few Data and Low Cost.” Animals 13(20): 3168. Control Strategies for Smart Grid Integration.” e-Prime - Advances in Electrical Engineering, Electronics and Narayanan, A., and Kapoor, S. 2023a. “Evaluating Moundridou, M., Matzakos, N., and Doukakis, S. Energy 10: 100856. LLMs Is a Minefield ” https://www.cs.princeton.edu/ 2024. “Generative AI Tools as Educators’ Assistants: ~arvindn/talks/evaluating_llms_minefield/. Designing and Implementing Inquiry-Based Lesson Muralidharan, K., Singh, A., and Ganimian, A. J. Plans.” Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence 2019. “Disrupting Education? Experimental Evidence Narayanan, A., and Kapoor, S. 2023b. “GPT-4 and 7: 100277. on Technology-Aided Instruction in India.” American Professional Benchmarks: The Wrong Answer to the Economic Review 109(4): 1426–1460. Wrong Question.” https://www.aisnakeoil.com/p/gpt-4- Moura, L., Jones, D. T., Sheikh, I. S., Murphy, S., Kal- and-professional-benchmarks. fin, M., Kummer, B. R., Weathers, A. L., and others. Muro, J., Linstädter, A., Magdon, P., Wöllauer, S., 2024. “Implications of Large Language Models for Männer, F. A., Schwarz, L.-M., Ghazaryan, G., and oth- Narayanan, A., and Kapoor, S. 2024. AI Snake Oil: Quality and Efficiency of Neurologic Care: Emerging Is- ers. 2022. “Predicting Plant Biomass and Species Rich- What Artificial Intelligence Can Do, What It Can’t, and sues in Neurology.” Neurology 102(11): e209497. ness in Temperate Grasslands across Regions, Time, How to Tell the Difference. Princeton, NJ: Princeton and Land Management with Remote Sensing and Deep University Press. Moyer, C. A., Abedini, N. C., Youngblood, J., Talib, Learning.” Remote Sensing of Environment 282: 113262. Z., Jayaraman, T., Manzoor, M., Larson, H. J., and Narayanan, D. 2019. “Technology and Political Will others. 2018. “Advancing Women Leaders in Global Muro, M., Methkupally, S., and Kinder, M. 2025. Can Create Better Governance.” The Economist, 22 Health: Getting to Solutions.” Annals of Global Health “The Geography of Generative AI’s Workforce Im- March. https://www.economist.com/open-future/2019 84(4): 743. pacts Will Likely Differ from Those of Previous Tech- /03/22/technology-and-political-will-can-create-better nologies.” Brookings Institution [Online]. https://www -governance. Mozilla. 2019. “We Asked People around the World How .brookings.edu/articles/the-geography-of-generative They Feel About Artificial Intelligence. Here’s What We -ais-workforce-impacts-will-likely-differ-from-those-of National Domestic Workers Alliance. n.d. “Break- Learned.” https://foundation.mozilla.org /en/blog/we- -previous-technologies/. Accessed 19 February 2025. through for Gig Workers.” https://www.domesticworkers asked-people-around-the-world-how -they-feel-about- .org/campaign-updates/breakthrough-for-gig-workers/. artificial-intelligence-heres-what-we -learned/. Ac- Musslick, S., Bartlett, L. K., Chandramouli, S. H., Accessed 28 April 2025. cessed 21 August 2024. Dubova, M., Gobet, F., Griffiths, T. L., Hullman, J., and others. 2025. “Automating the Practice of Sci- Navajas, J., Niella, T., Garbulsky, G., Bahrami, B., M-Shule. 2023a. “Educate, Engage, Assess and Sur- ence: Opportunities, Challenges, and Implications.” and Sigman, M. 2018. “Aggregated Knowledge from vey Hard-to-Reach Populations in Africa.” https://www Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences a Small Number of Debates Outperforms the Wisdom .mshule.com/. Accessed 29 March 2025. 122(5): e2401238121. of Large Crowds.” Nature Human Behaviour 2(2): 126–132. M-Shule. 2023b. “M-Shule: Case Studies, Our Impact.” Muthukrishna, M. 2025. “AI Can Revolutionize Educa- https://www.mshule.com/case-studies/our-impact. Ac- tion but Technology Is Not Enough and Most Countries Naveed, H., Khan, A.U., Qiu, S., Saqib, M., Anwar, S., cessed 6 November 2023. Are Not Ready.” HDRO background paper available on Usman, M., Akhtar, N., and others. 2023. “A Compre- request. hensive Overview of Large Language Models.” arXiv Mukand, S., and Rodrik, D. 2018. “The Political preprint arXiv:2307.06435. Economy of Ideas: On Ideas Versus Interests in Policy- Mutiso, R. M. 2024. “AI in Africa: Basics over Buzz.” making.” Working Paper 24467, National Bureau of Science 383(6690): eado8276. Neumann, N., Tucker, C. E., Kaplan, L., Mislove, Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. A., and Sapiezynski, P. 2024. “Data Deserts and Mutiso, R. M. 2025. “Beyond the Binary: Navigating Black Boxes: The Impact of Socio-Economic Status Mukherjee, A., and Chang, H. H. 2025. “Agentic AI: AI’s Uncertain Future in Africa.” Science 388(6742): on Consumer Profiling.” Management Science 70(11): Expanding the Algorithmic Frontier of Creative Problem eadw9439. 8003–8029. Solving.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00289. Nadeem, M., Bethke, A., and Reddy, S. 2020. “Ste- Neves, B. B., and Mead, G. 2021. “Digital Technology Mulder, F., Ferguson, J., Groenewegen, P., Boersma, reoset: Measuring Stereotypical Bias in Pretrained Lan- and Older People: Towards a Sociological Approach K., and Wolbers, J. 2016. “Questioning Big Data: guage Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09456. to Technology Adoption in Later Life.” Sociology 55(5): Crowdsourcing Crisis Data Towards an Inclusive 888–905. Humanitarian Response.” Big Data & Society 3(2): Nagapurkar, P., and Smith, J. D. 2019. “Techno-Eco- 2053951716662054. nomic Optimization and Social Costs Assessment of Newlands, G. 2021. “Lifting the Curtain: Strategic Vis- Microgrid-Conventional Grid Integration Using Genetic ibility of Human Labour in AI-as-a-Service.” Big Data & Muldoon, J., Cant, C., Wu, B., and Graham, M. 2024. Algorithm and Artificial Neural Networks: A Case Study Society 8(1): 20539517211016026. “A Typology of Artificial Intelligence Data Work.” Big for Two Us Cities.” Journal of Cleaner Production 229: Data & Society 11(1): 20539517241232632. 552–569. Nezhurina, M., Cipolina-Kun, L., Cherti, M., and Jit- sev, J. 2024. “Alice in Wonderland: Simple Tasks Show- Muldoon, J., Graham, M., and Cant, C. 2024. Feeding Nakano, R., Hilton, J., Balaji, S., Wu, J., Ouyang, ing Complete Reasoning Breakdown in State-of-the-Art the Machine: The Hidden Human Labour Powering AI. L., Kim, C., Hesse, C., and others. 2021. “WebGPT: Large Language Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406 Canongate Books. Browser-Assisted Question-Answering with Human .02061. Feedback.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.09332. Mullainathan, S., and Rambachan, A. 2024. “From Nguyen, E., Poli, M., Durrant, M. G., Kang, B., Katrek- Predictive Algorithms to Automatic Generation of Napal, D. 2024. “Imitation Is the Sincerest Form of ar, D., Li, D. B., Bartie, L. J., and others. 2024. “Se- Anomalies.” Working Paper 32422, National Bureau of Fraudulent Activity: Artificial Intelligence in Financial quence Modeling and Design from Molecular to Ge- Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Scams against Older Adults.” Bifocal 45(6): 185–187. nome Scale with Evo.” Science 386(6723): eado9336. 248 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Ni, J., Wu, T., Zhu, X., Hu, G., Zou, D., Wu, X., Li, R., Nussberger, A.-M., Luo, L., Celis, L. E., and Crockett, Olson, P., and Prince, R. 2025. “Paul Mccartney’s and others. 2021. “Simulation of the Present and Fu- M. J. 2022. “Public Attitudes Value Interpretability but AI Battle Should Spark a Copyright Revolution.” ture Projection of Permafrost on the Qinghai-Tibet Prioritize Accuracy in Artificial Intelligence.” Nature Bloomberg, https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion Plateau with Statistical and Machine Learning Models.” Communications 13(1): 5821. /articles/2025-02-28/paul-mccartney-s-ai-battle-in-the Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 126(2): -uk-should-spark-a-copyright-revolution. e2020JD033402. Nuwer, R. 2024. “Africa’s Newest Resource Could Be a Game-Changer for the Global South.” Nature 633: Open A.I. 2025. “Announcing the Stargate Project.” Nie, J., Shao, H., Fan, Y., Shao, Q., You, H., Preindl, S12–S14. https://openai.com/index/announcing-the-stargate M., and Jiang, X. 2024. “LLM-Based Conversational AI -project/. Therapist for Daily Functioning Screening and Psycho- Nweje, U., Amaka, N. S., and Makai, C. C. 2025. therapeutic Intervention Via Everyday Smart Devices.” “Women in Stem: Breaking Barriers and Building the Orben, A., and Przybylski, A. K. 2019. “The Associa- arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10779. Future.” International Journal of Science and Research tion between Adolescent Well-Being and Digital Tech- Archive 14(1) nology Use.” Nature Human Behaviour 3(2): 173–182. Nordhaus, W. D. 2004. “Schumpeterian Profits in the American Economy: Theory and Measurement.” Work- Nyhan, B., Settle, J., Thorson, E., Wojcieszak, M., Orben, A., Dienlin, T., and Przybylski, A. K. 2019. ing Paper 10433, National Bureau of Economic Re- Barberá, P., Chen, A. Y., Allcott, H., and others. 2023. “Social Media’s Enduring Effect on Adolescent Life search, Cambridge, MA. “Like-Minded Sources on Facebook Are Prevalent but Satisfaction.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Not Polarizing.” Nature 2023 620:7972 620(7972): Sciences 116(21): 10226–10228. Nordhaus, W. D. 2007. “Two Centuries of Productivity 137–144. Growth in Computing.” The Journal of Economic His- Orben, A., Meier, A., Dalgleish, T., and Blakemore, tory 67(1): 128–159. Obi, C. L., Olowoyo, J. O., Malevu, T. D., Mugivhisa, S.-J. 2024. “Mechanisms Linking Social Media Use to L. L., Hungwe, T., Ogunrombi, M. O., and Mkolo, N. Adolescent Mental Health Vulnerability.” Nature Re- Nordhaus, W. D. 2021. “Are We Approaching an Eco- M. 2024. “Impact of Artificial Intelligence and Digital views Psychology: 1–17. nomic Singularity? Information Technology and the Technology-Based Diagnostic Tools for Communicable Future of Economic Growth.” American Economic Jour- and Non-Communicable Diseases in Africa.” African Ord, T. 2020. The Precipice: Existential Risk and the nal: Macroeconomics 13(1): 299–332. Journal of Laboratory Medicine 13(1): 2516. Future of Humanity. Hachette Books. Normile, I. H. 2025. “A Model for Understanding and Odgers, C. L. 2024. “The Great Rewiring: Is Social Osnabrügge, M., Ash, E., and Morelli, M. 2023. Expanding the Scope of Critical Thinking.” Studies in Media Really Behind an Epidemic of Teenage Mental “Cross-Domain Topic Classification for Political Texts.” Philosophy and Education: 1–21. Illness?” Nature 628(8006): 29–30. Political Analysis 31(1): 59–80. Norori, N., Hu, Q., Aellen, F. M., Faraci, F. D., and Tz- OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Otake, T. 2016. “IBM Big Data Used for Rapid Diagno- ovara, A. 2021. “Addressing Bias in Big Data and AI for Development). 2023a. “Health at a Glance 2023.” sis of Rare Leukemia Case in Japan.” The Japan Times. Health Care: A Call for Open Science.” Patterns 2(10). Paris: OECD Publishing. https://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2016/08/11/national /science-health/ibm-big-data-used-for-rapid-diagnosis Nosta, J. 2025. “The Shadow of Cognitive Laziness OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and -of-rare-leukemia-case-in-japan/. Accessed 18 October in the Brilliance of LLMs.” The Digital Self. https://www Development). 2023b. PISA 2022 Results (Volume I). 2024. .psychologytoday.com/us/blog/the-digital-self/202501 Paris: OECD Publishing. /the-shadow-of-cognitive-laziness-in-the-brilliance-of Otis, N. G., Delecourt, S., Cranney, K., and Koning, -llms. Accessed 27 February 2025. OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and R. 2024. “Global Evidence on Gender Gaps and Gen- Development). 2024a. “Managing Screentime.” PISA erative AI.” Working Paper 25-023, Harvard Business Novy-Marx, R., and Velikov, M. Z. 2025. “AI-Powered in Focus 124, OECD Publishing, Paris. School, Cambridge, MA. (Finance) Scholarship.” Working Paper 33363, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Otis, N., Clarke, R., Delecourt, S., Holtz, D., and Kon- Development). 2024b. PISA 2022 Results: Creative ing, R. 2024. “The Uneven Impact of Generative AI on Nowotny, H. 2021. In AI We Trust: Power, Illusion and Minds, Creative Schools. Paris: OECD Publishing. Entrepreneurial Performance.” Working Paper 24-042, Control of Predictive Algorithms. John Wiley & Sons. Harvard Business School, Cambridge, MA. OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Noy, S., and Zhang, W. 2023. “Experimental Evidence Development). 2024c. Job Creation and Local Eco- Otto, I. M., Donges, J. F., Cremades, R., Bhowmik, on the Productivity Effects of Generative Artificial Intel- nomic Development 2024 the Geography of Genera- A., Hewitt, R. J., Lucht, W., Rockström, J., and others. ligence.” Science 381(6654): 187–192. tive AI. Paris: OECD Publishing. 2020. “Social Tipping Dynamics for Stabilizing Earth’s Climate by 2050.” Proceedings of the National Acad- Nugraha, H., Hernawan, H., Ali, M., Rahmat, A., Sep- OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and emy of Sciences of the United States of America 117(5): tianto, I., Aryati, A., and Suryadi, D. 2024. “Outdoor Development). 2025a. OECD AI Policy Observatory. 2354–2365. Activities and Outdoor Environments for Fitness and Paris: OECD Publishing. Mental Health: A Systematic Review.” Retos: nuevas Ouyang, L., Wu, J., Jiang, X., Almeida, D., Wain- tendencias en educación física, deporte y recreación OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and wright, C., Mishkin, P., Zhang, C., and others. 2022. (59): 642–648. Development). 2025b. Policies, Data and Analysis “Training Language Models to Follow Instructions with for Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence. OECD A.I Policy Human Feedback.” Advances in Neural Information Núñez-Jaramillo, L., Herrera-Solís, A., and Herrera- Observatory. Processing Systems 35: 27730–27744. Morales, W. V. 2021. “ADHD: Reviewing the Causes and Evaluating Solutions.” Journal of Personalized OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Ovadya, A. 2023. “Meta Ran a Giant Experiment Medicine 11(3): 166. Development). 2025c. Intellectual Property Issues in in Governance. Now It’s Turning to AI.” https://www Artificial Intelligence Trained on Scraped Data. Paris: .wired.com/story/meta-ran-a-giant-experiment-in Nurdiantami, Y., and Agil, H. M. 2020. “The Use of OECD Publishing. -governance-now-its-turning-to-ai/. Technology in Early Childhood Education: A System- atic Review. International Conference of Health De- OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Oxford Insights. 2023. Government AI Readiness In- velopment. Covid-19 and the Role of Healthcare Work- Development). n.d. “ Skills for Jobs Database.” https:// dex 2023. Oxford, UK: Oxford Insights. ers in the Industrial Era (ICHD 2020). Atlantis Press.” www.oecdskillsforjobsdatabase.org/#FR/_. Accessed https://www.atlantis-press.com/proceedings/ichd-20 11 March 2025. Oxford Insights. 2024. Government AI Readiness In- /125946610. Accessed 28 March 2025. dex 2024. Oxford, UK: Oxford Insights. Olson, P. 2024. Supremacy: AI, ChatGPT, and the Nussbaum, M. C. 2003. “Capabilities as Fundamental Race That Will Change the World. New York: St. Mar- Pagliari, M., Chambon, V., and Berberian, B. 2022. Entitlements: Sen and Social Justice.” Feminist Eco- tin’s Press. “What Is New with Artificial Intelligence? Human–Agent nomics 3(1): 1–51. REFERENCES 249 Interactions through the Lens of Social Agency.” Fron- Pärli, K. 2022. “Impacts of Digitalisation on Employ- Peña, P., Moyano, D., Dunstan, J., and Rufs, C. 2023. tiers in Psychology 13: 954444. ment Relationships and the Need for More Democracy “Digital Gendered Violence in Chile: Development of a at Work.” Industrial Law Journal 51(1): 84–108. System for Report, Monitoring and Response-Orienta- PAI (The Partnership on AI). 2024. “The Partnership tion Based on a Feminist Chatbot| Sofia.” In Inteligencia on AI.” https://partnershiponai.org/. Accessed 4 May Parli, V. 2025. How Disruptive Is Deepseek? Stanford Artificial Feminista: hacia una agenda de investigación 2025. Hai Faculty Discuss China’s New Model. Stanford Re- para América Latina y el Caribe. Pasto, Colombia: Fun- port [Online]. https://news.stanford.edu/stories/2025 dación Vía Libre. Pailey, R. N. 2020. “De-Centring the ‘White Gaze’of /02/how-disruptive-is-deepseek. Development.” Development and Change 51(3): Peng, B., Galley, M., He, P., Cheng, H., Xie, Y., Hu, 729–745. Parmar, P., Ryu, J., Pandya, S., Sedoc, J., and Agar- Y., Huang, Q., and others. 2023a. “Check Your Facts wal, S. 2022. “Health-Focused Conversational Agents and Try Again: Improving Large Language Models with Palmer, K., Marengoni, A., Forjaz, M. J., Jureviciene, in Person-Centered Care: A Review of Apps.” NPJ Digi- External Knowledge and Automated Feedback.” arXiv E., Laatikainen, T., Mammarella, F., Muth, C., and oth- tal Medicine 5(1): 21. preprint arXiv:2302.12813. ers. 2018. “Multimorbidity Care Model: Recommenda- tions from the Consensus Meeting of the Joint Action Parsa, A. D., Hakkim, S., Vinnakota, D., Mahmud, I., Peng, H., Teplitskiy, M., Romero, D. M., and Horvát, on Chronic Diseases and Promoting Healthy Ageing Bulsari, S., Dehghani, L., Pulikkottil, A.-T., Sivasubra- E.-Á. 2022. “The Gender Gap in Scholarly Self-Promo- across the Life Cycle (Ja-Chrodis).” Health Policy 122(1): manian, M., and Kabir, R. 2023. “Artificial Intelligence tion on Social Media.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.05330. 4–11. for Global Healthcare.” Artificial Intelligence in Medical Virology. Springer. Peng, K., Garg, N., and Kleinberg, J. 2024. “A No Free Pan, B., Hembrooke, H., Joachims, T., Lorigo, L., Gay, Lunch Theorem for Human-AI Collaboration.” arXiv pre- G., and Granka, L. 2007. “In Google We Trust: Users’ Participedia. 2025. https://participedia.net/. Accessed print arXiv:2411.15230. Decisions on Rank, Position, and Relevance.” Journal 13 April 2025. of Computer-Mediated Communication 12(3): 801–823. Peng, S., Kalliamvakou, E., Cihon, P., and Demirer, Paudel, D., Boogaard, H., de Wit, A., Janssen, S., M. 2023. “The Impact of AI on Developer Productiv- Pan, X., Dai, J., Fan, Y., and Yang, M. 2024. “Frontier Osinga, S., Pylianidis, C., and Athanasiadis, I. N. ity: Evidence from Github Copilot.” arXiv preprint arXiv: AI Systems Have Surpassed the Self-Replicating Red 2021. “Machine Learning for Large-Scale Crop Yield 2302.06590. Line.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.12140. Forecasting.” Agricultural Systems 187: 103016. Pentina, I., Hancock, T., and Xie, T. 2023. “Explor- Panch, T., Pearson-Stuttard, J., Greaves, F., and Paugam, L., Stolowy, H., and Gendron, Y. 2021. “De- ing Relationship Development with Social Chatbots: A Atun, R. 2019. “Artificial Intelligence: Opportunities and ploying Narrative Economics to Understand Financial Mixed-Method Study of Replika.” Computers in Human Risks for Public Health.” The Lancet Digital Health 1(1): Market Dynamics: An Analysis of Activist Short Sellers’ Behavior 140: 107600. e13-e14. Rhetoric.” Contemporary Accounting Research 38(3): 1809–1848. Pentina, I., Xie, T., Hancock, T., and Bailey, A. 2023. Pannone, A., Raj, A., Ravichandran, H., Das, S., Chen, “Consumer–Machine Relationships in the Age of Ar- Z., Price, C. A., Sultana, M., and Das, S. 2024. “Ro- Paul, A., Yu, C. L., Susanto, E. A., Lau, N. W. L., and tificial Intelligence: Systematic Literature Review and bust Chemical Analysis with Graphene Chemosensors Meadows, G. I. 2024. “Agentpeertalk: Empowering Research Directions.” Psychology & Marketing 40(8): and Machine Learning.” Nature 634(8034): 572–578. Students through Agentic-AI-Driven Discernment of 1593–1614. Bullying and Joking in Peer Interactions in Schools.” Pansardi, P., and Bindi, M. L. 2021. “The New Con- arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01459. Pentland, A., and Tsai, L. 2024. “Toward Building De- cepts of Power? Power-over, Power-to and Power- liberative Digital Media: From Subversion to Consen- With.” Journal of Political Power 14: 51–71. Pawlowski, J., Bonin, A., Boyer, F., Cordier, T., and sus.” PNAS Nexus 3(10). Taberlet, P. 2021. “Environmental DNA for Biomonitor- Papadakis, S., Kalogiannakis, M., and Zaranis, N. ing.” Molecular Ecology 30(13): 2931–2936. Pereira, V., Hadjielias, E., Christofi, M., and Vrontis, 2018. “The Effectiveness of Computer and Tablet As- D. 2023. “A Systematic Literature Review on the Im- sisted Intervention in Early Childhood Students’ Under- Pearl, J. 2018. Theoretical Impediments to Machine pact of Artificial Intelligence on Workplace Outcomes: standing of Numbers. An Empirical Study Conducted in Learning with Seven Sparks from the Causal Revolu- A Multi-Process Perspective.” Human Resource Man- Greece.” Education and Information Technologies 23: tion. Proceedings of the 11th ACM International Confer- agement Review 33(1): 1–22. 1849–1871. ence on Web Search and Data Mining. Marina Del Rey, CA: Association for Computing Machinery. Perry, A. M., and Lee, N. T. 2019. “AI Is Com- Papadopoulos, C. 2024. “Large Language Models ing to Schools, and If We’re Not Careful, So for Autistic and Neurodivergent Individuals: Concerns, Pedreschi, D., Pappalardo, L., Ferragina, E., Baeza- Will Its Biases.” Brookings Commentary. https:// Benefits and the Path Forward.” Neurodiversity 2: Yates, R., Barabási, A.-L., Dignum, F., Dignum, V., www.brookings.edu /articles/ai-is-coming-to-schools- 27546330241301938. and others. 2025. “Human-AI Coevolution.” Artificial and-if-were-not -careful-so-will-its-biases/. Accessed Intelligence 339: 104244. 28 March 2025. Park, H., Li, Z., and Walsh, A. 2024. “Has Generative Artificial Intelligence Solved Inverse Materials Design?” Pedro, F., Subosa, M., Rivas, A., and Valverde, P. Perry, A., and Turner-Lee, N. 2019. “AI Can Disrupt Ra- Matter 7(7): 2355–2367. 2019. “Artificial Intelligence in Education: Challenges cial Inequity in Schools, or Make It Much Worse.” https:// and Opportunities for Sustainable Development.” hechingerreport.org/ai-can-disrupt-racial-inequity-in Park, M., Leahey, E., and Funk, R. J. 2023. “Papers Working Papers on Educational Policy, UNESCO, Paris. -schools-or-make-it-much-worse/. and Patents Are Becoming Less Disruptive over Time.” Nature 613(7942): 138–144. Peebles, E. 2014. “Cyberbullying: Hiding Behind the Personal Data Protection Commission. 2025. Screen.” Paediatrics & Child Health 19(10): 527–528. “Personal Data Protection Act.” https://www .pdpc Park, S., Im, J., Jang, E., and Rhee, J. 2016. “Drought .gov.sg /help-and-resources/2020/01/model-ai Assessment and Monitoring through Blending of Multi- Peeters, M. M. M., van Diggelen, J., van den Bosch, -governance -framework. Sensor Indices Using Machine Learning Approaches K., Bronkhorst, A., Neerincx, M. A., Schraagen, J. for Different Climate Regions.” Agricultural and Forest M., and Raaijmakers, S. 2021. “Hybrid Collective In- Perspective. 2025. “Build with Perspective API.” Meteorology 216: 157–169. telligence in a Human–AI Society.” AI & Society 36(1): https://developers.perspectiveapi.com/s/?language= 217–238. en_US. Accessed 17 March 2025. Park, T., Mahmud, T. I., Lee, J., Hong, S., Park, J. Y., Ji, Y., Chang, T., and others. 2024. “A Machine-Learn- Pellert, M., Lechner, C. M., Wagner, C., Rammstedt, Pesando, L. M. 2022. “Safer If Connected? Mobile ing-Enabled Smart Neckband for Monitoring Dietary B., and Strohmaier, M. 2024. “AI Psychometrics: As- Technology and Intimate Partner Violence.” Demogra- Intake.” PNAS Nexus 3(5). sessing the Psychological Profiles of Large Language phy 59(2): 653–684. Models through Psychometric Inventories.” Perspec- tives on Psychological Science 19(5): 808–826. 250 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Pesando, L. M., and Qiyomiddin, K. 2023. “Mobile Pilditch, T. D. 2024. “The Reasoning under Uncer- Vehicle to Grid and Grid to Vehicle Controller for Elec- Phones and Infant Health at Birth.” PloS One 18(9): tainty Trap: A Structural AI Risk.” arXiv preprint arXiv: tric Vehicle Charging Station.” Ain Shams Engineering e0288089. 2402.01743. Journal 15(10): 102937. Pescetelli, N., Rutherford, A., and Rahwan, I. 2020. Pilotto, A., Boi, R., and Petermans, J. 2018. “Technol- Praticò, S., Solano, F., Di Fazio, S., and Modica, G. “Diversity Promotes Collective Intelligence in Large ogy in Geriatrics.” Age and Ageing 47(6): 771–774. 2021. “Machine Learning Classification of Mediterra- Groups but Harms Small Ones.” PsyArXiv, 2 January. nean Forest Habitats in Google Earth Engine Based Pincock, K., Betts, A., and Easton-Calabria, E. 2021. on Seasonal Sentinel-2 Time-Series and Input Image Pescetelli, N., Rutherford, A., and Rahwan, I. 2021. “The Rhetoric and Reality of Localisation: Refugee-Led Composition Optimisation.” Remote Sensing 13(4): 586. “Modularity and Composite Diversity Affect the Collec- Organisations in Humanitarian Governance.” The Jour- tive Gathering of Information Online.” Nature Commu- nal of Development Studies 57(5): 719–734. Prelec, D. D. D., Seung, H. S., and McCoy, J. 2017. “A nications 12(1): 3195. Solution to the Single-Question Crowd Wisdom Prob- Pinhanez, C. S., Cavalin, P. R., Vasconcelos, M., and lem.” Nature 541(7638): 532–535. Peter G. Peterson Foundation. 2024. “7 Key Facts Nogima, J. 2023. “Balancing Social Impact, Opportuni- About U.S. Healthcare Spending.” https://www.pgpf ties, and Ethical Constraints of Using AI in the Docu- Price, I., Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Alet, F., Andersson, .org/blog/2024/03/7-key-facts-about-us-healthcare mentation and Vitalization of Indigenous Languages.” T. R., El-Kadi, A., Masters, D., Ewalds, T., and others. -spending. Accessed 9 October 2024. IJCAI: 6174–6182. 2024. “Probabilistic Weather Forecasting with Machine Learning.” Nature. Peters, H., and Matz, S. C. 2024. “Large Language Pittro, C., Lazdins, J., Bulger, C., Prateek, J., Qi, R., Models Can Infer Psychological Dispositions of Social and Ananthan, V. 2024. “Automotive Component De- Prince, J. T., and Wallsten, S. 2022. “How Much Is Pri- Media Users.” PNAS Nexus 3(6). sign at Nifco Using Generative AI and Diffusion Models vacy Worth around the World and across Platforms?” | Aws Hpc Blog.” Journal of Economics & Management Strategy 31(4): Pham, A.-D., Ngo, N.-T., Ha Truong, T. T., Huynh, N.- 841–861. T., and Truong, N.-S. 2020. “Predicting Energy Con- Plan International. 2020. “State of the World’s Girls sumption in Multiple Buildings Using Machine Learn- 2020: Free to Be Online?” https://plan-international Pritchett, L. 2024. “Investing in Human Capital in Af- ing for Improving Energy Efficiency and Sustainability.” .org/publications/free-to-be-online/. Accessed 28 April rica: A Framework for Research.” International Journal Journal of Cleaner Production 260: 121082. 2025. of Educational Development 107: 103048. Pham, T. D., Yokoya, N., Nguyen, T. T. T., Le, N. N., Ha, Plathottam, S. J., Rzonca, A., Lakhnori, R., and Il- Pritchett, L., and Viarengo, M. 2023. “The Learning N. T., Xia, J., Takeuchi, W., and Pham, T. D. 2021. “Im- oeje, C. O. 2023. “A Review of Artificial Intelligence Crisis of Developing Country Elites: Lessons from PISA- provement of Mangrove Soil Carbon Stocks Estimation Applications in Manufacturing Operations.” Journal of D.” The World Bank Economic Review 37(2): 177–204. in North Vietnam Using Sentinel-2 Data and Machine Advanced Manufacturing and Processing 5(3): e10159. Learning Approach.” GIScience & Remote Sensing Prodhan, F. A., Zhang, J., Hasan, S. S., Pangali 58(1): 68–87. Platt, J., Nong, P., Carmona, G., and Kardia, S. 2024. Sharma, T. P., and Mohana, H. P. 2022. “A Review of “Public Attitudes toward Notification of Use of Artificial Machine Learning Methods for Drought Hazard Moni- Phan, L., Gatti, A., Han, Z., Li, N., Hu, J., Zhang, H., Intelligence in Health Care.” JAMA Network Open 7(12): toring and Forecasting: Current Research Trends, Chal- Shi, S., and others. 2025. “Humanity’s Last Exam.” e2450102–e2450102. lenges, and Future Research Directions.” Environmen- arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14249. tal Modelling & Software 149: 105327. Pollock, L. J., Kitzes, J., Beery, S., Gaynor, K. M., Jar- Phillips, M., Marsden, H., Jaffe, W., Matin, R. N., Wali, zyna, M. A., Mac Aodha, O., Meyer, B., and others. Prunkl, C. 2022. “Human Autonomy in the Age of Ar- G. N., Greenhalgh, J., McGrath, E., and others. 2019. 2025. “Harnessing Artificial Intelligence to Fill Global tificial Intelligence.” Nature Machine Intelligence 4(2): “Assessment of Accuracy of an Artificial Intelligence Shortfalls in Biodiversity Knowledge.” Nature Reviews 99–101. Algorithm to Detect Melanoma in Images of Skin Le- Biodiversity 1(3): 166–182. sions.” JAMA Network Open 2(10): e1913436–e1913436. Puja, S. S., Neha, N. N., Alif, O. R., Sultan, T. J., Hus- Polverini, G., and Gregorcic, B. 2024. “How Under- na, M. G. Z. A., Jahan, I., and Noor, J. 2024. “Explor- Piaggi, P. M., Weis, J., Panagiotopoulos, A. Z., De- standing Large Language Models Can Inform the Use ing the Barriers to Feminine Healthcare Access among benedetti, P. G., and Car, R. 2022. “Homogeneous of ChatGPT in Physics Education.” European Journal of Marginalized Women in Bangladesh and Facilitating Ice Nucleation in an Ab Initio Machine-Learning Model Physics 45(2): 025701. Access through a Voice Bot.” Heliyon 10(14). of Water.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- ences 119(33): e2207294119. Ponnusamy, P., Ghias, A., Yi, Y., Yao, B., Guo, C., and Purcell, Z. A., and Bonnefon, J.-F. 2023. “Research Sarikaya, R. 2022. “Feedback-Based Self-Learning in on Artificial Intelligence Is Reshaping Our Definition of Piao, J., Lu, Z., Gao, C., Xu, F., Santos, F. P., Li, Y., Large-Scale Conversational AI Agents.” AI Magazine Morality.” Psychological Inquiry 34(2): 100–101. and Evans, J. 2025. “Emergence of Human-Like Po- 42(4): 43–56. larization among Large Language Model Agents.” arXiv Purves, D. 2019. “What Does AI’s Success Playing preprint arXiv:2501.05171. Poole, L. 2018. “Transforming the Humanitarian Fi- Complex Board Games Tell Brain Scientists?” Proceed- nancing Landscape.” NEAR Network Strategy Paper, ings of the National Academy of Sciences 116(30): PIB Delhi. 2025. “India’s AI Revolution: A Roadmap to Network for Empowered Aid Response, Nairobi. http:// 14785–14787. Viksit Bharat.” Ministry of Electronics & IT. near.ngo/imgtemp/downloadfile/NEAR%20Network %20Pooled%20Funding%20Strategy20. Pyzer-Knapp, E. O., Pitera, J. W., Staar, P. W., Takeda, Pichai, S. 2024. “Q3 Earnings Call: Ceo’s Remarks.” S., Laino, T., Sanders, D. P., Sexton, J., Smith, J. R., https://blog.google/inside-google/message-ceo Pothong, K. 2025. “Child Rights by Design for Human and Curioni, A. 2022. “Accelerating Materials Dis- /alphabet-earnings-q3-2024/#search. Accessed 5 Development: Reimagining a Rights-Respecting Digital covery Using Artificial Intelligence, High Performance March 2025 World for Children.” Unpublished background paper. Computing and Robotics.” NPJ Computational Materi- als 8(1): 84. Pierson, E., Shanmugam, D., Movva, R., Kleinberg, Prat, A. 2018. “Media Power.” Journal of Political Econ- J., Agrawal, M., Dredze, M., Ferryman, K., and oth- omy 126(4): 1747–1783. Qazi, S., Khawaja, B. A., and Farooq, Q. U. 2022. ers. 2025. “Using Large Language Models to Promote “IoT-Equipped and AI-Enabled Next Generation Smart Health Equity.” NEJM AI 2(2): AIp2400889. Prat, A., and Valletti, T. 2022. “Attention Oligopoly.” Agriculture: A Critical Review, Current Challenges and American Economic Journal: Microeconomics 14(3): Future Trends.” IEEE Access 10: 21219–21235. Piir, R. 2023. “Finland’s ChatGPT Equivalent Begins to 530–57. Think in Estonian as Well.” ERR News. Accessed 5 July Qi, Y., Schölkopf, B., and Jin, Z. 2024. “Causal Re- 2024. Pratap Singh, A., Kumar, Y., Sawle, Y., Alotaibi, M. sponsibility Attribution for Human-AI Collaboration.” A., Malik, H., and Pedro García Márquez, F. 2024. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.03275. “Development of Artificial Intelligence-Based Adaptive REFERENCES 251 Qiao, R., Liu, C., and Xu, J. 2024. “Making Algorithmic for Chest Radiograph Diagnosis: A Retrospective Com- (COLING 2025), 3697–3715. Abu Dhabi, UAE: Associa- App Use a Virtuous Cycle: Influence of User Gratifica- parison of the Chexnext Algorithm to Practicing Radi- tion for Computational Linguistics. tion and Fatigue on Algorithmic App Dependence.” ologists.” PLoS Medicine 15(11): e1002686. Humanities and Social Sciences Communications 11(1): Republic of Korea Ministry of Science and ICT. 2024. 1–10. Raman, N., Lundy, T., Amouyal, S., Levine, Y., Leyton- “The National AI Research Hub Launched.” https://www Brown, K., and Tennenholtz, M. 2024. “Rationality .korea.net/Government/Briefing-Room/Press-Releases Qiu, H., Xia, D., and Yetman, J. 2025. “The Role of Report Cards: Assessing the Economic Rationality of /view?articleId=7667&type=O&insttCode=. Accessed 1 Geopolitics in International Trade.” BIS Working Papers Large Language Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402 April 2025. 1249, Bank for International Settlements, Basel. .09552. Reset. 2023. “Risk to Minors: News from Our On- Raghavan, M. 2023. “What Should We Do When Our Rambachan, A. 2024. “Identifying Prediction Mistakes going Research on Platforms’ Risks to Minors.” https:// Ideas of Fairness Conflict?” Communications of the in Observational Data.” The Quarterly Journal of Eco- www.reset.tech/resources/risks-to-minors-reset-tech ACM 67(1): 88–97. nomics 139(3): 1665–1711. -evaluation-reports/. Accessed 22 January 2025. Rahman, R., Owen, D., and You, J. 2024. “Tracking Rani, U., and Williams, M. 2025. “From Taylorism to Resnick, M. 2023. “Generative AI and Creative Learn- Large-Scale AI Models.” EpochAI. https://epoch.ai/blog Algorithmic Management: Emerging Trends across ing: Concerns, Opportunities, and Choices.” https:// /tracking-large-scale-ai-models. Sectors in Regular Workplaces.” ILO Working Paper. mres.medium.com/ai-and-creative-learning-concerns -opportunities-and-choices-63b27f16d4d0. Accessed Rahwan, I. 2018. “Society-in-the-Loop: Programming Rani, U., Castel-Branco, R., Satija, S., and Nayar, M. 2 February 2025. the Algorithmic Social Contract.” Ethics and Information 2022. Women, Work, and the Digital Economy. Taylor Technology 20(1): 5–14. & Francis. Resnik, D. B., Hosseini, M., Kim, J. J. H., Epiphaniou, G., and Maple, C. 2025. “Genai Synthetic Data Create Rahwan, I., Cebrian, M., Obradovich, N., Bongard, Rani, U., Pesole, A., and Vázquez, I. G. 2024. Algo- Ethical Challenges for Scientists. Here’s How to Ad- J., Bonnefon, J.-F., Breazeal, C., Crandall, J. W., and rithmic Management Practices in Regular Workplaces: dress Them.” Proceedings of the National Academy of others. 2019. “Machine Behaviour.” Nature 568(7753): Case Studies in Logistics and Healthcare. Publications Sciences 122(9): e2409182122. 477–486. Office of the European Union Luxembourg. Restrepo, P. 2024. “Automation: Theory, Evidence, Raihan, A. 2023. “Artificial Intelligence and Machine Rathje, S., Mirea, D.-M., Sucholutsky, I., Marjieh, R., and Outlook.” Annual Review of Economics 16(1): 1–25. Learning Applications in Forest Management and Bio- Robertson, C. E., and Van Bavel, J. J. 2024. “GPT diversity Conservation.” Natural Resources Conserva- Is an Effective Tool for Multilingual Psychological Text Reverberi, C., Rigon, T., Solari, A., Hassan, C., Cheru- tion and Research 6(2): 3825. Analysis.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- bini, P., Antonelli, G., Awadie, H., and others. 2022. ences 121(34): e2308950121. “Experimental Evidence of Effective Human–AI Collab- Rainie, L., Funk, C., Anderson, M., and Tyson, A. oration in Medical Decision-Making.” Scientific Reports 2022. “AI and Human Enhancement: Americans’ Open- Ravi, P., Masla, J., Kakoti, G., Lin, G., Anderson, E., 12(1): 14952. ness Is Tempered by a Range of Concerns.” Pew Re- Taylor, M., Ostrowski, A., and others. 2025. “Co-De- search Center. https://www.pewresearch.org/internet signing Large Language Model Tools for Project-Based Reynolds, S. A., Beery, S., Burgess, N., Burgman, /2022/03/17/how-americans-think-about-artificial Learning with K12 Educators.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502 M., Butchart, S. H. M., Cooke, S. J., Coomes, D., and -intelligence/. Accessed 17 January 2024. .09799. others. 2025. “The Potential for AI to Revolutionize Conservation: A Horizon Scan.” Trends in Ecology & Raisch, S., and Krakowski, S. 2021. “Artificial Intelli- Raymond, L. 2024. “The Market Effects of Algorithms.” Evolution. gence and Management: The Automation–Augmenta- Working Paper. tion Paradox.” Academy of Management Review 46(1): Rhizome. 2023. “Rhizome Raises $2.5 Million, Launch- 192–210. Raymond, N., and Al Achkar, Z. 2016. “Data Pre- es to Ensure a Resilient Grid.” https://www.rhizomedata paredness: Connecting Data, Decision-Making and Hu- .com/news/rhizome-raises-2-5-million-launches-to Raja, A. K., and Zhou, J. 2023. “AI Accountability: Ap- manitarian Response.” Harvard Humanitarian Initiative: -ensure-resilient-grid. Accessed 4 May 2025. proaches, Affecting Factors, and Challenges.” Com- Signal Program on Human Security and Technology- puter 56(4): 61–70. Standards and Ethics Series 1. Ribeiro, M. H., Ottoni, R., West, R., Almeida, V. A. F., and Wagner Meira, W. M. 2020. “Auditing Radicaliza- Raja, D. S. 2016. “Bridging the Disability Divide through Reckling, W., Mitasova, H., Wegmann, K., Kauffman, tion Pathways on Youtube.” Proceedings of the 2020 Digital Technologies.” Background paper for the World G., and Reid, R. 2021. “Efficient Drone-Based Rare Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transpar- Development Report 2016, World Bank, Washington, Plant Monitoring Using a Species Distribution Model ency, ACM Press, 131–141. DC. and AI-Based Object Detection.” Drones 5(4): 110. Rich, M. D. 2018. Truth Decay: An Initial Exploration of Raji, I. D., Bender, E. M., Paullada, A., Denton, E., Reid-Green, K. S. 1989. “The History of Census Tabula- the Diminishing Role of Facts and Analysis in American and Hanna, A. 2021. “AI and the Everything in the tion.” Scientific American 260(2): 98–103. Public Life. Rand Corporation. Whole Wide World Benchmark.” arXiv preprint arXiv: 2111.15366. Reijnders, L. S. M., Timmer, M. P., and Ye, X. 2021. Richerson, P. J., Boyd, R. T., and Efferson, C. 2024. “Labour Demand in Global Value Chains: Is There a “Agentic Processes in Cultural Evolution: Relevance to Raji, I. D., Gebru, T., Mitchell, M., Buolamwini, J., Lee, Bias against Unskilled Work?” The World Economy Anthropocene Sustainability.” Philosophical Transac- J., and Denton, E. 2020. “Saving Face: Investigating 44(9): 2547–2571. tions of the Royal Society B 379(1893): 20220252. the Ethical Concerns of Facial Recognition Auditing.” Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Eth- Rekker, R. 2021. “The Nature and Origins of Political Richtel, M., Pearson, C., and Levenson, M. 2023. ics, and Society. https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3375627 Polarization over Science.” Public Understanding of “Surgeon General Warns That Social Media May Harm .3375820. Accessed 5 June 2024. Science 30(4): 352–368. Children and Adolescents.” The New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2023/05/23/health/surgeon Rajkumar, K., Saint-Jacques, G., Bojinov, I., Bryn- Ren, F., Aliper, A., Chen, J., Zhao, H., Rao, S., Kuppe, -general-social-media-mental-health.html. Accessed 4 jolfsson, E., and Aral, S. 2022. “A Causal Test of the C., Ozerov, I. V., and others. 2024. “A Small-Molecule April 2025. Strength of Weak Ties.” Science 377(6612): 1304–1310. TNIK Inhibitor Targets Fibrosis in Preclinical and Clinical Models.” Nature Biotechnology: 1–13. Riedl, C., Kim, Y. J., Gupta, P., Malone, T. W., and Rajpurkar, P., Chen, E., Banerjee, O., and Topol, E. Woolley, A. W. 2021. “Quantifying Collective Intelli- J. 2022. “AI in Health and Medicine.” Nature Medicine Ren, R., Wang, Y., Qu, Y., Zhao, W. X., Liu, J., Wu, H., gence in Human Groups.” Proceedings of the National 28(1): 31–38. Wen, J.-R., and Wang, H. 2025. “Investigating the Fac- Academy of Sciences 118(21): e2005737118. tual Knowledge Boundary of Large Language Models Rajpurkar, P., Irvin, J., Ball, R. L., Zhu, K., Yang, B., with Retrieval Augmentation.” Proceedings of the 2025 Rigas, S., Papachristou, M., Papadopoulos, T., An- Mehta, H., Duan, T., and others. 2018. “Deep Learning International Conference on Computational Linguistics agnostopoulos, F., and Alexandridis, G. 2024. 252 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 “Adaptive Training of Grid-Dependent Physics-In- Rodrik, D., and Sandhu, R. 2024. “Servicing Devel- Rosenbacke, R., Melhus, Å., McKee, M., and Stuckler, formed Kolmogorov-Arnold Networks.” IEEE Access 12: opment: Productive Upgrading of Labor-Absorbing D. 2024. “How Explainable Artificial Intelligence Can 176982–176998. Services in Developing Economies.” Working Paper Increase or Decrease Clinicians’ Trust in AI Applica- 32738, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam- tions in Health Care: Systematic Review.” JMIR AI 3: Rikap, C. 2024. “Dynamics of Corporate Governance bridge, MA. e53207. Beyond Ownership in AI.” https://www.common-wealth .org/publications/dynamics-of-corporate-governance Rodrik, D., and Stiglitz, J. 2024. A New Growth Strat- Rosenberg, J., Karger, E., Morris, A., Hickman, M., -beyond-ownership-in-ai. egy for Developing Nations. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Hadshar, R., Jacobs, Z., and Tetlock, P. 2024. Roots University. of Disagreement on AI Risk. Forecasting Research Rita Gonçalves, A., Costa Pinto, D., Gonzalez- Institute. Jimenez, H., Dalmoro, M., and Mattila, A. S. 2025. Roepstorff, K. 2020. “A Call for Critical Reflection on “Me, Myself, and My AI: How Artificial Intelligence Clas- the Localisation Agenda in Humanitarian Action.” Third Rosenblatt, M., Tejavibulya, L., Jiang, R., Noble, S., sification Failures Threaten Consumers’ Self-Expres- World Quarterly 41(2): 284–301. and Scheinost, D. 2024. “Data Leakage Inflates Pre- sion.” Journal of Business Research 186: 114974. diction Performance in Connectome-Based Machine Rolf, E., Proctor, J., Carleton, T., Bolliger, I., Shankar, Learning Models.” Nature Communications 15(1): 1829. Ritchie, H. 2024. “Australia Approves Social Media V., Ishihara, M., Recht, B., and Hsiang, S. 2021. “A Ban on under-16s.” BBC. https://www.bbc.com/news Generalizable and Accessible Approach to Machine Rosman, L., Lampert, R., Zhuo, S., Li, Q., Varma, N., /articles/c89vjj0lxx9o. Accessed 4 April 2025. Learning with Global Satellite Imagery.” Nature Com- Burg, M., Gaffey, A. E., Armbruster, T., and Gehi, A. munications 12(1): 4392. 2024. “Wearable Devices, Health Care Use, and Psy- Riyadh, M. 2024. “Transforming the Shipping Indus- chological Well-Being in Patients with Atrial Fibrilla- try with Autonomous Ships and Artificial Intelligence.” Roli, A., J. Jaeger, and S. A. Kauffman. 2022. “How tion.” Journal of the American Heart Association 13(15): Journal of Maritime Technology and Society. Organisms Come to Know the World: Fundamental e033750. Limits on Artificial General Intelligence.” Frontiers in Robbins, R., and Brodwin, E. 2020. “Artificial Intelli- Ecology and Evolution 9: 806283. https://doi.org/10 Rossiter, M. W. 1993. “The Matthew Matilda Effect in gence Systems Are Learning to Identify Patients Who .3389/fevo.2021.806283. Science.” Social Studies of Science 23(2): 325–341. Need Extra Care. But Hospitals Are Falling Short in Explaining How It Works.” STAT. https://www.statnews Rollend, D., Foster, K., Kott, T. M., Mocharla, R., Mu- Rotenstein, L. S., and Wachter, R. M. 2024. “Are Ar- .com/2020/07/15/artificial-intelligence-patient-consent ñoz, R., Fendley, N., Ashcraft, C., and others. 2023. tificial Intelligence–Generated Replies the Answer to -hospitals/. 2024. “Machine Learning for Activity-Based Road Transpor- the Electronic Health Record Inbox Problem?” JAMA tation Emissions Estimation.” Environmental Data Sci- Network Open 7(10): e2438528–e2438528. Roberts, A., Hinds, J., and Camic, P. M. 2020. “Nature ence 2: e38. Activities and Wellbeing in Children and Young People: Rotondi, V., Kashyap, R., Pesando, L. M., Spinelli, S., A Systematic Literature Review.” Journal of Adventure Rolnick, D., Donti, P. L., Kaack, L. H., Kochanski, K., and Billari, F. C. 2020. “Leveraging Mobile Phones to Education and Outdoor Learning 20(4): 298–318. Lacoste, A., Sankaran, K., Ross, A. S., and others. Attain Sustainable Development.” Proceedings of the 2022. “Tackling Climate Change with Machine Learn- National Academy of Sciences 117(24): 13413–13420. Robertson, N., Sanders, D., Seymour, P., and Thom- ing.” ACM Comput. Surv. 55(2): 42:1–42:96. as, R. 1997. “The Four-Colour Theorem.” Journal of Roytburg, E. 2024. “Google Unceremoniously Combinatorial Theory, Series B 70(1): 2–44. Romer, P. M. 1990. “Endogenous Technological Dropped Its Promise of Carbon Neutrality, with Emis- Change.” Journal of Political Economy 98(5, Part 2): sions Rising Nearly 50% over the Last Five Years.” Robeyns, I. 2005. “The Capability Approach: A Theo- S71–S102. Fortune. retical Survey.” Journal of Human Development 6(1): 93–117. Romer, P. M. 1994. “The Origins of Endogenous Rozado, D. 2024. “The Political Preferences of LLMs.” Growth.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 8(1): 3–22. PLOS ONE 19(7): e0306621. Robeyns, I. 2016. “Capabilitarianism.” Journal of Hu- man Development and Capabilities 17(3): 397–414. Romera-Paredes, B., Barekatain, M., Novikov, A., Rubeis, G. 2020. “The Disruptive Power of Artificial Balog, M., Kumar, M. P., Dupont, E., Ruiz, F. J. R., Intelligence: Ethical Aspects of Gerontechnology in Rodríguez-Modroño, P., Agenjo-Calderón, A., and and others. 2024. “Mathematical Discoveries from Elderly Care.” Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics López-Igual, P. 2022. “Platform Work in the Domestic Program Search with Large Language Models.” Nature 91: 104186. and Home Care Sector: New Mechanisms of Invisibility 625(7995): 468–475. and Exploitation of Women Migrant Workers.” Gender & Rudin, C. 2019. “Stop Explaining Black Box Machine Development 30(3): 619–635. Roopaei, M., Horst, J., Klaas, E., Foster, G., Salmon- Learning Models for High Stakes Decisions and Use Stephens, T. J., and Grunow, J. 2021. “Women in AI: Interpretable Models Instead.” Nature Machine Intel- Rodrik, D. 2012. “Unconditional Convergence in Man- Barriers and Solutions.” 2021 IEEE World AI IoT Con- ligence 1(5): 206–215. ufacturing.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 128(1): gress (AIIoT), 0497–0503. 165–204. Rudolph, E., Seer, H., Mothes, C., and Albrecht, J. Roos, M., and Reccius, M. 2024. “Narratives in Eco- 2024. “Automated Feedback Generation in an Intel- Rodrik, D. 2015. “Premature Deindustrialization.” nomics.” Journal of Economic Surveys 38(2): 303–341. ligent Tutoring System for Counselor Education.” Pro- Working Paper 20935, National Bureau of Economic ceedings of the 19th Conference on Computer Science Research, Cambridge, MA. Roose, K. 2024. “Can A.I. Be Blamed for a Teen’s and Intelligence Systems (FedCSIS 2024), 501–512. Suicide?” New York Times, 23 October. https://www Annals of Computer Science and Information Systems, Rodrik, D. 2016. “Premature Deindustrialization.” Jour- .nytimes.com/2024/10/23/technology/characterai Volume 39. IEEE. https://doi.org/10.15439/2024F1649. nal of Economic Growth 21: 1–33. -lawsuit-teen-suicide.html. Accessed 29 March 2025. Rueda, J., Rodríguez, J. D., Jounou, I. P., Hortal-Car- Rodrik, D. 2023. “A Comment On: ‘Presidential Ad- Rose, K. 2025. “Not a Coder? With A.I., Just Having an mona, J., Ausín, T., and Rodríguez-Arias, D. 2024. dress: Demand-Side Constraints in Development: The Idea Can Be Enough.” The New York Times, 27 Febru- ““Just” Accuracy? Procedural Fairness Demands Ex- Role of Market Size, Trade, and (in)Equality,’ by Pinelopi ary. https://www.nytimes.com/2025/02/27/technology plainability in AI-Based Medical Resource Allocations.” Koujianou Goldberg and Tristan Reed.” Econometrica /personaltech/vibecoding-ai-software-programming AI & SOCIETY 39(3): 1411–1422. 91(6): 1959–1962. .html. Rupp, K. 2022. Transistors Per Microprocessor. Tran- Rodrik, D. 2024. “Prospects for Global Economic Rosen, R. 1991. Life Itself: A Comprehensive Inquiry sistors per microprocessor. processed by Our World in Convergence under New Technologies.” Harnessing into the Nature, Origin, and Fabrication of Life. New Data. Technology for Inclusive Prosperity: Growth, Work, and York: Columbia University Press. Inequality in the Digital Era: 93. Russakovsky, O., Deng, J., Su, H., Krause, J., Sath- eesh, S., Ma, S., Huang, Z., and others. 2015. REFERENCES 253 “Imagenet Large Scale Visual Recognition Chal- the Mind of Chatbot Users and Unveiling the Intricate Sartori, L., and Theodorou, A. 2022. “A Sociotech- lenge.” International Journal of Computer Vision 115(3): Connections between User Perception, Trust and Ste- nical Perspective for the Future of AI: Narratives, In- 211–252. reotype Perception on Self-Esteem and Psychological equalities, and Human Control.” Ethics and Information Well-Being.” Current Psychology 43(9): 7843–7858. Technology 24(1): 4. Russell, S. 2019. Human-Compatible: Artificial Intelli- gence and the Problem of Control. Viking. Saliba, V., Legido-Quigley, H., Hallik, R., Aaviksoo, Sarwar, N. 2022. “Experts Warn AI Assistants Are Hurt- A., Car, J., and McKee, M. 2012. “Telemedicine across ing the Social Development of Children.” https://www Russell, S., and Norvig, P. 2021. “Artificial Intelli- Borders: A Systematic Review of Factors That Hinder .digitaltrends.com/mobile/digital-assistants-alexa-siri gence: A Modern Approach, 4th Us Ed.” https://aima.cs or Support Implementation.” International Journal of -research-affecting-social-growth-skills-children/. Ac- .berkeley.edu/. Medical Informatics 81(12): 793–809. cessed 9 May 2024. Saadeh, A. 2023. “Unpopular Opinion: AI in Educa- Salinas, A., Haim, A., and Nyarko, J. 2024. “What’s Satici, S. A., Gocet Tekin, E., Deniz, M. E., and Satici, tion Redefining Creativity.” Inside Telecom. https:// in a Name? Auditing Large Language Models for Race B. 2023. “Doomscrolling Scale: Its Association with insidetelecom.com/unpopular-opinion-ai-in-education and Gender Bias.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.14875. Personality Traits, Psychological Distress, Social Media -redefining-creativity/. Accessed 28 April 2025. Use, and Wellbeing.” Applied Research in Quality of Salmon, F. 2025. “The Paradox at the Heart of the AI Life 18(2): 833–847. SaberiKamarposhti, M., Ng, K.-W., Yadollahi, M., Ka- Debate.” https://www.msn.com/en-us/money/markets myab, H., Cheng, J., and Khorami, M. 2024. “Cultivat- /the-paradox-at-the-heart-of-the-ai-debate/ar-AA1y3jI4. Saura García, C. 2024. “Datafeudalism: The Domina- ing a Sustainable Future in the Artificial Intelligence Era: Accessed 4 May 2025. tion of Modern Societies by Big Tech Companies.” Phi- A Comprehensive Assessment of Greenhouse Gas losophy & Technology 37(3): 90. Emissions and Removals in Agriculture.” Environmental Saltz, E., Jalan, Z., and Acosta, T. 2024. “Re-Ranking Research 250: 118528. News Comments by Constructiveness and Curiosity Savage, N. 2020. “The Race to the Top among the Significantly Increases Perceived Respect, Trustworthi- World’s Leaders in Artificial Intelligence.” Nature Sabzehgar, R., Amirhosseini, D. Z., and Rasouli, M. ness, and Interest.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05429. 588(7837): S102-S102. 2020. “Solar Power Forecast for a Residential Smart Microgrid Based on Numerical Weather Predictions Us- Salvagni, J., Grohmann, R., and Matos, É. 2022. Saxena, D., and Guha, S. 2024. “Algorithmic Harms in ing Artificial Intelligence Methods.” Journal of Building “Gendering Platform Co-Operativism: The Rise of Child Welfare: Uncertainties in Practice, Organization, Engineering 32: 101629. Women-Owned Rider Co-Operatives in Brazil and and Street-Level Decision-Making.” ACM Journal on Spain.” Gender & Development 30(3): 707–724. Responsible Computing 1(1): 1–32. Sachan, S., Yang, J.-B., Xu, D.-L., Benavides, D. E., and Li, Y. 2020. “An Explainable AI Decision-Support- Samuel, R. 1977. “Workshop of the World: Steam Pow- Sayari, M., Haghighi, M. R. R., Lankarani, K. B., System to Automate Loan Underwriting.” Expert Sys- er and Hand Technology in Mid-Victorian Britain.” His- Ghahramani, S., and Honarvar, B. 2022. “Road Traffic tems with Applications 144: 113100. tory Workshop Journal 3(1): 6–72. Death Rate and Human Development Index in 2007– 2016 at the Global Level: Trend Analysis.” Sack, D., Krayer, L., Wiles, E., Abbadi, M., Awasthi, Samuthira Pandian, A., Medina, P. A. I., Yahyazadeh, U., Kennedy, R., Arnolds, C., and Candelon, F. S., Nguyen, K. V., Miller, R., Aetukuri, N. P., and La, Schaake, M. 2024. “The Tech Coup: How to Save 2024. “GenAI Doesn’t Just Increase Productivity. It Ex- Y.-H. 2020. “Flexible, Synergistic Ceramic–Polymer Democracy from Silicon Valley.” Princeton University pands Capabilities.” Boston Consulting Group. https:// Hybrid Solid-State Electrolyte for Secondary Lithium Press. www.bcg.com/publications/2024/gen-ai-increases Metal Batteries.” ACS Applied Energy Materials 3(12): -productivity-and-expands-capabilities. 12709–12715. Scharre, P. 2016. “Autonomous Weapons and Opera- tional Risk.” Center for a New American Security. Sadek, M., Kallina, E., Bohné, T., Mougenot, C., Cal- Sanders, N. R., Boone, T., Ganeshan, R., and Wood, vo, R. A., and Cave, S. 2024. “Challenges of Responsi- J. D. 2019. “Sustainable Supply Chains in the Age of AI Schenkenberg van Mierop, E., Montemurro, M., ble AI in Practice: Scoping Review and Recommended and Digitization: Research Challenges and Opportuni- Wendt, K., and Lilly, D. 2020. “Consultancy on Risk Actions.” AI & Society. ties.” Journal of Business logistics 40(3): 229–240. Sharing.” Discussion Paper, HERE-Geneva. https://here -geneva.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/HERE_NL Sadowski, J. 2019. “When Data Is Capital: Datafication, Sandoval-Almazan, R., Millan-Vargas, A. O., and Gar- -ICRC_Risk-Sharing-Report-1.pdf. Accumulation, and Extraction.” Big Data & Society 6(1): cia-Contreras, R. 2024. “Examining Public Managers’ 2053951718820549. Competencies of Artificial Intelligence Implementation Schewel, L., Co, S., Willoughby, C., Yan, L., Clarke, N., in Local Government: A Quantitative Study.” Govern- Wergin, J., and Data, S. 2021. “Non-Traditional Meth- Sadowski, J., Viljoen, S., and Whittaker, M. 2021. ment Information Quarterly 41(4): 101986. ods to Obtain Annual Average Daily Traffic (AADT).” “Everyone Should Decide How Their Digital Data Are Publication FHWA-PL-21- 031, United States Depart- Used—Not Just Tech Companies.” Nature 595(7866): Sandvik, K. B. 2023. Humanitarian Extractivism: The ment of Transportation. 169–171. Digital Transformation of Aid. Manchester, UK: Man- chester University Press. Schick, T., Dwivedi-Yu, J., Dessì, R., Raileanu, R., Sagona, M., Dai, T., Macis, M., and Darden, M. 2025. Lomeli, M., Hambro, E., Zettlemoyer, L., Cancedda, “Trust in AI-Assisted Health Systems and AI’s Trust in Santos, F. P., Lelkes, Y., and Levin, S. A. 2021. “Link N., and Scialom, T. 2023. “Toolformer: Language Humans.” NPJ Health Systems 2(1): 10. Recommendation Algorithms and Dynamics of Polar- Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools.” Ad- ization in Online Social Networks.” Proceedings of the vances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36: Saha, S. 2024. “Google Partners with Apollo Radiol- National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 68539–68551. ogy for Early Disease Detection in India.” Analytics In- America 118(50): e2102141118-e2102141118. dia Magazine. https://analyticsindiamag.com/ai-news Schmid, S., Lambach, D., Diehl, C., and Reuter, C. -updates/google-partners-with-apollo-radiology-to Santu, S. K. K., and Feng, D. 2023. “Teler: A General 2025. “Arms Race or Innovation Race? Geopolitical AI -detect-diseases-early-in-india/. Accessed 18 October Taxonomy of LLM Prompts for Benchmarking Complex Development.” Geopolitics: 1–30. 2024. Tasks.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.11430. Schneider, T., Behera, S., Boccaletti, G., Deser, C., Sakai, M., Sakurai, A., Lu, S., Olano, J., Albrecht, C. Sapci, A. H., and Sapci, H. A. 2019. “Innovative As- Emanuel, K., Ferrari, R., Leung, L. R., and others. M., Hamann, H. F., and Freitag, M. 2024. “AI-Accel- sisted Living Tools, Remote Monitoring Technologies, 2023. “Harnessing AI and Computing to Advance erated Nazca Survey Nearly Doubles the Number of Artificial Intelligence-Driven Solutions, and Robotic Climate Modelling and Prediction.” Nature Climate Known Figurative Geoglyphs and Sheds Light on Their Systems for AGIng Societies: Systematic Review.” JMIR Change 13(9): 887–889. Purpose.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- Aging 2(2): e15429. ences 121(40): e2407652121. Schoene, A., Ramachandranpillai, R., Lazovich, T., Sarkar, R., Samuel, D., Dunbar, L., and Monnerat, G. and Baeza-Yates, R. 2024. “All Models Are Wrong, Salah, M., Alhalbusi, H., Ismail, M. M., and Abdel- 2024. “5 Years of the Lancet Digital Health.” The Lan- but Some Are Deadly: Inconsistencies in Emotion fattah, F. 2024. “Chatting with ChatGPT: Decoding cet Digital Health 6(5): e299. 254 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Detection in Suicide-Related Tweets.” Proceedings Selbst, A. D., and Barocas, S. 2018. “The Intuitive AI in Social-Media in Mental Health of Users.” Pre- of the Third Workshop on NLP for Positive Impact, Appeal of Explainable Machines.” Fordham L. Rev. 87: sented at the 5th International Conference on Ad- 113–122. 1085. vances in Science and Technology (ICAST). 10.1109/ ICAST55766.2022.10039585. https://ieeexplore.ieee Schoenegger, P., Park, P. S., Karger, E., Trott, S., and Seldon, A., Abidoye, O., and Metcalf, T. 2020. The .org/document/10039585/. Accessed 30 March 2025. Tetlock, P. E. 2024a. “AI-Augmented Predictions: LLM Fourth Education Revolution Reconsidered: Will Artifi- Assistants Improve Human Forecasting Accuracy.” cial Intelligence Enrich or Diminish Humanity? : Legend Shahriar, S., Corradini, M. G., Sharif, S., Moussa, M., ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. Press Ltd. and Dara, R. 2025. “The Role of Generative Artificial Intelligence in Digital Agri-Food.” Journal of Agriculture Schoenegger, P., Tuminauskaite, I., Park, P. S., Bas- Selwyn, N. 2019. Should Robots Replace Teachers? AI and Food Research 20: 101787. tos, R. V. S., and Tetlock, P. E. 2024b. “Wisdom of and the Future of Education. John Wiley & Sons. the Silicon Crowd: LLM Ensemble Prediction Capabili- Shandhi, M. M. H., Singh, K., Janson, N., Ashar, P., ties Rival Human Crowd Accuracy.” Science Advances Sen, A. 1973. “Behaviour and the Concept of Prefer- Singh, G., Lu, B., Hillygus, D. S., Maddocks, J. M., and 10(45): eadp1528. ence.” Economica 40(159): 241–259. Dunn, J. P. 2024. “Assessment of Ownership of Smart Devices and the Acceptability of Digital Health Data Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Hubert, T., Si- Sen, A. 1977. “Rational Fools: A Critique of the Behav- Sharing.” NPJ Digital Medicine 7(1): 44. monyan, K., Sifre, L., Schmitt, S., Guez, A., and oth- ioral Foundations of Economic Theory.” Philosophy & ers. 2020. “Mastering Atari, Go, Chess and Shogi by Public Affairs 6(4): 317–344. Shapira, N., Levy, M., Alavi, S. H., Zhou, X., Choi, Y., Planning with a Learned Model.” Nature 588(7839): Goldberg, Y., Sap, M., and Shwartz, V. 2024. “Clever 604–609. Sen, A. 1985. “Well-Being, Agency and Freedom: The Hans or Neural Theory of Mind? Stress Testing Social Dewey Lectures 1984.” The Journal of Philosophy Reasoning in Large Language Models.” Proceedings of Schuengel, C., and van Heerden, A. 2023. “Edito- 82(4): 169–221. the 18th Conference of the European Chapter of the rial: Generative Artificial Intelligence and the Ecology Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: of Human Development.” Journal of child psychology Sen, A. 1992. Inequality Reexamined. Cambridge, MA: Long Papers), 2257–2273. and psychiatry 64(9): 1261–1263. Harvard University Press. Sharma, M., Tong, M., Korbak, T., Duvenaud, D., Schuster, N., and Lazar, S. 2025. “Attention, Moral Sen, A. 1997. “Maximization and the Act of Choice.” Askell, A., Bowman, S. R., Cheng, N., and others. Skill, and Algorithmic Recommendation.” Philosophical Econometrica 65(4): 745–779. 2023. “Towards Understanding Sycophancy in Lan- Studies 182(1): 159–184. guage Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.13548. Sen, A. 1999. Development as Freedom. New York: Schut, L., Tomašev, N., McGrath, T., Hassabis, D., Anchor Books. Sharma, P., Gero, S., Payne, R., Gruber, D. F., Rus, D., Paquet, U., and Kim, B. 2025. “Bridging the Human– Torralba, A., and Andreas, J. 2024. “Contextual and AI Knowledge Gap through Concept Discovery and Sen, A. 2001. “Other People.” Proceedings of the Brit- Combinatorial Structure in Sperm Whale Vocalisations.” Transfer in Alphazero.” Proceedings of the National ish Academy, Oxford University Press 111: 319–338. Nature Communications 15(1): 3617. Academy of Sciences 122(13): e2406675122. Sen, A. 2008. “The Idea of Justice.” Journal of Human Sharma, R. 2024. “How Public-Private Partnerships Schwiter, K., and Steiner, J. 2020. “Geographies of Development 9(3): 331–342. Can Ensure Ethical, Sustainable and Inclusive AI De- Care Work: The Commodification of Care, Digital Care velopment.” WEF. Futures and Alternative Caring Visions.” Geography Sen, A. 2013. “The Ends and Means of Sustainability.” Compass 14(12): e12546. Journal of Human Development and Capabilities 14(1): Shattock, A. J., Johnson, H. C., Sim, S. Y., Carter, A., 6–20. Lambach, P., Hutubessy, R. C., Thompson, K. M., Scott Kruse, C., Karem, P., Shifflett, K., Vegi, L., Ravi, and others. 2024. “Contribution of Vaccination to Im- K., and Brooks, M. 2018. “Evaluating Barriers to Adopt- Sen, K., Prybutok, G., and Prybutok, V. 2022. “The proved Survival and Health: Modelling 50 Years of the ing Telemedicine Worldwide: A Systematic Review.” Use of Digital Technology for Social Wellbeing Re- Expanded Programme on Immunization.” The Lancet Journal of telemedicine and telecare 24(1): 4–12. duces Social Isolation in Older Adults: A Systematic 403(10441): 2307–2316. Review.” SSM: Population Health 17: 101020. Scott Morton, F. 2024. “Can Massive Technological Sheikh, M. M. R., and Rogers, M. M. 2024. “Technol- Progress Hurt Workers? A Review of Power and Prog- Seo, J., Kim, S., Jalalvand, A., Conlin, R., Rothstein, ogy-Facilitated Sexual Violence and Abuse in Low and ress by Daron Acemoğlu and Simon Johnson.” Journal A., Abbate, J., Erickson, K., and others. 2024. “Avoid- Middle-Income Countries: A Scoping Review.” Trauma, of Economic Literature 62(4): 1671–1681. ing Fusion Plasma Tearing Instability with Deep Re- Violence, & Abuse 25(2): 1614–1629. inforcement Learning.” Nature 626(8000): 746–751. Scott, R. A., Stuart, J., and Barber, B. L. 2021. “Con- Shen, H., Knearem, T., Ghosh, R., Alkiek, K., Krishna, temporary Friendships and Social Vulnerability among Seo, W., Yuan, Z., and Bu, Y. 2025. “ValuesRAG: K., Liu, Y., Ma, Z., and others. 2024. “Towards Bidi- Youth: Understanding the Role of Online and Offline Enhancing Cultural Alignment through Retrieval-Aug- rectional Human-AI Alignment: A Systematic Review for Contexts of Interaction in Friendship Quality.” Journal mented Contextual Learning.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501 Clarifications, Framework, and Future Directions.” arXiv of Social and Personal Relationships 38(12): 3451–3471. .01031. preprint arXiv:2406.09264. Scott, R. A., Stuart, J., and Barber, B. L. 2022. “Con- Septiandri, A. A., Constantinides, M., and Quercia, Shevtsova, D., Ahmed, A., Boot, I. W., Sanges, C., necting with Close Friends Online: A Qualitative Analy- D. 2024. “The Potential Impact of AI Innovations on US Hudecek, M., Jacobs, J. J., Hort, S., and Vrijhoef, H. J. sis of Young Adults’ Perceptions of Online and Offline Occupations.” PNAS Nexus 3(9). 2024. “Trust in and Acceptance of Artificial Intelligence Social Interactions with Friends.” Computers in Human Applications in Medicine: Mixed Methods Study.” JMIR Behavior Reports 7: 100217. Seydl, J., and Linden, J. 2024. “How AI Can Boost Pro- Human Factors 11(1): e47031. ductivity and Jump Start Growth.” https://privatebank Security Hero. 2023. “2023 State of Deepfakes: Re- .jpmorgan.com/nam/en/insights/markets-and-investing Shew, A. 2020. “Ableism, Technoableism, and Future alities, Threats and Impact.” https://www.securityhero.io /ideas-and-insights/how-ai-can-boost-productivity-and AI.” IEEE Technology and Society Magazine 39(1): 40–85. /state-of-deepfakes/. Accessed 28 April 2025. -jump-start-growth. Accessed 15 January 2025. Shi, F., and Evans, J. 2023. “Surprising Combinations Sedek, S. S. S. 2021. “Innovative Solutions for Aware- Seyyed-Kalantari, L., Zhang, H., McDermott, M. B., of Research Contents and Contexts Are Related to Im- ness Campaign of Social Media Addiction and Its Con- Chen, I. Y., and Ghassemi, M. 2021. “Underdiagno- pact and Emerge with Scientific Outsiders from Distant sequences.” International Design Journal 11(2): 131–156. sis Bias of Artificial Intelligence Algorithms Applied to Disciplines.” Nature Communications 14(1): 1641. Chest Radiographs in under-Served Patient Popula- Sejnowski, T. J. 2023. “Large Language Models and tions.” Nature Medicine 27(12): 2176–2182. Shiferaw, H., Bewket, W., and Eckert, S. 2019. “Per- the Reverse Turing Test.” Neural Computation 35(3): formances of Machine Learning Algorithms for Map- 309–342. Shah, B., and Bilal, S. M. 2022. “A Comprehen- ping Fractional Cover of an Invasive Plant Species in sive Review of the Negative Impact of Integration of REFERENCES 255 a Dryland Ecosystem.” Ecology and Evolution 9(5): Signé, L. 2025. “Leveraging AI and Emerging Technol- Oximetry Measurement.” New England Journal of 2562–2574. ogies to Unlock Africa’s Potential.” Brookings Institute. Medicine 383(25): 2477–2478. Shiffrin, R., and Mitchell, M. 2023. “Probing the Psy- Silver, D., Hubert, T., Schrittwieser, J., Antonoglou, I., Skjuve, M., Følstad, A., Fostervold, K. I., and Brandt- chology of AI Models.” Proceedings of the National Lai, M., Guez, A., Lanctot, M., and others. 2018. “A zaeg, P. B. 2021. “My Chatbot Companion-a Study of Academy of Sciences 120(10): e2300963120. General Reinforcement Learning Algorithm That Mas- Human-Chatbot Relationships.” International Journal of ters Chess, Shogi, and Go through Self-Play.” Science Human-Computer Studies 149: 3–14. Shiller, R. J. 2020. Narrative Economics: How Stories 362(6419): 1140–1144. Go Viral and Drive Major Economic Events. Princedon, Skulmowski, A. 2023. “The Cognitive Architecture of NJ: Princeton University Press. Silvestro, D., Goria, S., Sterner, T., and Antonelli, A. Digital Externalization.” Educational Psychology Re- 2022. “Improving Biodiversity Protection through Arti- view 35(101): 1–21. Shimanovich, U., and Hartl, F. U. 2024. “Protein Fold- ficial Intelligence.” Nature Sustainability 5(5): 415–424. ing: From Physico-Chemical Rules and Cellular Machin- Slawomirski, L., Lindner, L., de Bienassis, K., Hay- eries of Protein Quality Control to AI Solutions.” Pro- Simchon, A., Edwards, M., and Lewandowsky, S. wood, P., Hashiguchi, T. C. O., Steentjes, M., and ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 121(34): 2024. “The Persuasive Effects of Political Microtar- Oderkirk, J. 2023. “Progress on Implementing and Us- e2411135121. geting in the Age of Generative Artificial Intelligence.” ing Electronic Health Record Systems: Developments PNAS Nexus 3(2): pgae035. in OECD Countries as of 2021.” Shin, H. J., Han, K., Ryu, L., and Kim, E.-K. 2023. “The Impact of Artificial Intelligence on the Reading Times of Simon, H. A. 1971. “Designing Organizations for an Slupska, J., and Tanczer, L. M. 2021. “Threat Mod- Radiologists for Chest Radiographs.” NPJ Digital Medi- Information-Rich World.” In Greeenbeger, M., (ed.) Com- eling Intimate Partner Violence: Tech Abuse as a cine 6(1): 82. puters, Communications, and the Public Interest. Balti- Cybersecurity Challenge in the Internet of Things.” In more, MD: The Johns Hopkins Press. Bailey, J., Flynn, A., and Henry, N. (Eds.), The Emerald Shin, M., Kim, J., Van Opheusden, B., and Griffiths, International Handbook of Technology-Facilitated T. L. 2023. “Superhuman Artificial Intelligence Can Im- Singh, A., and Joachims, T. 2018. Fairness of Expo- Violence and Abuse. Leeds, UK: Emerald Publishing prove Human Decision-Making by Increasing Novelty.” sure in Rankings. Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD Limited. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & 120(12): e2214840120. Data Mining. London, United Kingdom: Association for Smart Nation and Digital Government Office. n.d. Computing Machinery. “Smart Nation and Digital Government Office.” Govern- Shin, M., Kim, J., van Opheusden, B., and Griffiths, ment of Singapore. https://www.smartnation.gov .sg/. T. L. 2023. “Superhuman Artificial Intelligence Can Im- Singh, S., and Nambiar, V. 2024. “Role of Artificial Accessed 1 April 2025. prove Human Decision-Making by Increasing Novelty.” Intelligence in the Prevention of Online Child Sexual Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Abuse: A Systematic Review of Literature.” Journal of Smith, E. M., Graham, D., Morgan, C., and MacLach- 120(12): e2214840120. Applied Security Research: 1–42. lan, M. 2023. “Artificial Intelligence and Assistive Tech- nology: Risks, Rewards, Challenges, and Opportuni- Shivaprakash, K. N., Swami, N., Mysorekar, S., Arora, Singh, S., Kaur, N., and Gehlot, A. 2024. “Applica- ties.” Assistive Technology 35(5): 375–377. R., Gangadharan, A., Vohra, K., Jadeyegowda, M., tion of Artificial Intelligence in Drug Design: A Review.” and Kiesecker, J. M. 2022. “Potential for Artificial Intel- Computers in Biology and Medicine 179: 108810. Smith, G. 2009. Democratic Innovations: Designing ligence (AI) and Machine Learning (Ml) Applications in Institutions for Citizen Participation. Cambridge Univer- Biodiversity Conservation, Managing Forests, and Re- Singh, T., and Johnston, A. 2019. “How Much Is Too sity Press. lated Services in India.” Sustainability 14(12): 7154. Much: Employee Monitoring, Surveillance, and Strain.” ICIS 2019 Proceedings, 31. Smith, K. 2024. “The Biology of Smell Is a Mystery-AI Is Shiwani, T., Relton, S., Evans, R., Kale, A., Heaven, A., Helping to Solve It.” Nature 633(8028): 26–29. Clegg, A., and Todd, O. 2023. “New Horizons in Arti- Singh, V. 2024. “AI, Women’s Health Care, and Trust: ficial Intelligence in the Healthcare of Older People.” Problems and Prospects.” Artificial Intelligence and Smith, K. P., and Christakis, N. A. 2008. “Social Net- Age and Ageing 52(12): afad219. Machine Learning for Women’s Health Issues. Elsevier. works and Health.” Annual Review of Sociology 34: 405–429. Shrestha, S., Kim, M., and Ross, K. 2025. “Mathemati- Singhal, K., Azizi, S., Tu, T., Mahdavi, S. S., Wei, J., cal Reasoning in Large Language Models: Assessing Chung, H. W., Scales, N., and others. 2023. “Large Smith, P. K., and Livingstone, S. 2017. “Child Users Logical and Arithmetic Errors across Wide Numerical Language Models Encode Clinical Knowledge.” Nature of Online and Mobile Technologies–Risks, Harms and Ranges.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.08680. 620(7972): 172–180. Intervention.” Child psychology and psychiatry: Frame- works for clinical training and practice: 141–148. Shumailov, I., Shumaylov, Z., Zhao, Y., Papernot, N., Singhal, K., Tu, T., Gottweis, J., Sayres, R., Wulczyn, Anderson, R., and Gal, Y. 2024. “AI Models Collapse E., Amin, M., Hou, L., and others. 2025. “Toward Sobotkova, A., Kristensen-McLachlan, R. D., Mallon, When Trained on Recursively Generated Data.” Nature Expert-Level Medical Question Answering with Large O., and Ross, S. A. 2024. “Validating Predictions of 631(8022): 755–759. Language Models.” Nature Medicine 31: 943–950. Burial Mounds with Field Data: The Promise and Reality of Machine Learning.” Journal of Documentation 80(5): Si, C., Yang, D., and Hashimoto, T. 2024. “Can LLMs Sinha, A., Virk, V., Chakraborty, D., and Sreeja, P. 1167–1189. Generate Novel Research Ideas? A Large-Scale Hu- 2025. “ArxEval: Evaluating Retrieval and Generation in man Study with 100+ Nlp Researchers.” arXiv preprint Language Models for Scientific Literature.” arXiv pre- Socol de la Osa, D. U., and Remolina, N. 2024. “Ar- arXiv:2409.04109. print arXiv:2501.10483. tificial Intelligence at the Bench: Legal and Ethical Challenges of Informing—or Misinforming—Judicial Sibiya, W., and du Toit, D. 2022. “Sweeping up De- Sinka, M. E., Zilli, D., Li, Y., Kiskin, I., Msaky, D., Ki- Decision-Making through Generative AI.” Data & Policy cent Work: Paid Domestic Work and Digital Platforms in honda, J., Mkandawile, G., and others. 2021. “Hum- 6: e59. South Africa.” Gender & Development 30(3): 637–654. bug – an Acoustic Mosquito Monitoring Tool for Use on Budget Smartphones.” Methods in Ecology and Evolu- Solaiman, I., and Dennison, C. 2021. “Process for Siegel, A. A. 2020. “Online Hate Speech.” Social me- tion 12(10): 1848–1859. Adapting Language Models to Society (Palms) with dia and democracy: The state of the field, prospects Values-Targeted Datasets.” Advances in Neural Infor- for reform: 56–88. Sixsmith, A., Horst, B. R., Simeonov, D., and Mihaili- mation Processing Systems 34: 5861–5873. dis, A. 2022. “Older People’s Use of Digital Technolo- Siewert, M. B. 2018. “High-Resolution Digital Mapping gy During the Covid-19 Pandemic.” Bulletin of Science, Solow, R. 1987. “We’d Better Watch Out.” New York Re- of Soil Organic Carbon in Permafrost Terrain Using Ma- Technology & Society 42(1–2): 19–24. view of Books, July 12: 36. chine Learning: A Case Study in a Sub-Arctic Peatland Environment.” Biogeosciences 15(6): 1663–1682. Sjoding, M. W., Dickson, R. P., Iwashyna, T. J., Gay, Solow, R. M. 1956. “A Contribution to the Theory of S. E., and Valley, T. S. 2020. “Racial Bias in Pulse Economic Growth.” The Quarterly Journal of Econom- ics 70(1): 65–94. 256 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Song, J., Xu, Z., and Zhong, Y. 2025. “Out-of-Distri- Compromise Depth in Student Scientific Inquiry.” Com- Stoet, G., and Geary, D. C. 2022. “Sex Differences bution Generalization via Composition: A Lens through puters in Human Behavior 160: 108386. in Adolescents’ Occupational Aspirations: Variations Induction Heads in Transformers.” Proceedings of the across Time and Place.” Plos one 17(1): e0261438. National Academy of Sciences 122(6): e2417182122. Stagnaro, M. N., Tappin, B. M., and Rand, D. G. 2023. “No Association between Numerical Ability and Po- Strachan, J. W. A., Albergo, D., Borghini, G., Pan- Song, X., Basheer, C., Xu, J., and Zare, R. N. 2024. litically Motivated Reasoning in a Large Us Probability sardi, O., Scaliti, E., Gupta, S., Saxena, K., and oth- “Onsite Ammonia Synthesis from Water Vapor and Ni- Sample.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- ers. 2024. “Testing Theory of Mind in Large Language trogen in the Air.” Science Advances 10(50): eads4443. ences 120(32): e2301491120. Models and Humans.” Nature Human Behaviour 8: 1285–1295. Song, Y., Atza, E., Sánchez-Gil, J. J., Akkermans, D., Stanford Graduate School of Business. 2023. “The AI de Jonge, R., de Rooij, P. G. H., Kakembo, D., and Academy: Leveraging Education in AI to Unlock Tajiki- Stray, J. 2020. “Aligning AI Optimization to Community others. 2025. “Seed Tuber Microbiome Can Predict stan Economic Potential.” https://www.gsb.stanford.edu Well-Being.” International Journal of Community Well- Growth Potential of Potato Varieties.” Nature Microbiol- /faculty-research/case-studies/ai-academy-leveraging Being 3(4): 443–463. ogy 10(1): 28–40. -education-ai-unlock-tajikistans-economic. Accessed 13 December 2024. Stray, J., Halevy, A., Assar, P., Hadfield-Menell, D., Song, Y., Wang, X., and Li, G. 2024. “Can Social Me- Boutilier, C., Ashar, A., Bakalar, C., and others. 2024. dia Combat Gender Inequalities in Academia? Measur- Stanford Institute for Human-Centered AI. 2025. “Building Human Values into Recommender Systems: ing the Prevalence of the Matilda Effect in Communica- “The Global AI Vibrancy Tool 2024.” In: The Stanford An Interdisciplinary Synthesis.” ACM Computing Sur- tion.” Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication Institute for Human-Centered AI (ed.). veys 2(3): Article 20. 29(1): zmad050. Stanger, A., Kraus, J., Lim, W., Millman-Perlah, G., Strezoski, L., Padullaparti, H., Ding, F., and Baggu, Sonwani, E., Bansal, U., Alroobaea, R., Baqasah, A. and Schroeder, M. 2024. “Terra Incognita: The Gov- M. 2022. “Integration of Utility Distributed Energy M., and Hedabou, M. 2022. “An Artificial Intelligence ernance of Artificial Intelligence in Global Perspective.” Resource Management System and Aggregators Approach toward Food Spoilage Detection and Analy- Annual Review of Political Science 27. for Evolving Distribution System Operators.” Journal sis.” Frontiers in Public Health 9: 816226. of Modern Power Systems and Clean Energy 10(2): Statistica. 2024. “Worldwide Data Centers.” 277–285. Soroush, A., Glicksberg, B. S., Zimlichman, E., Barash, Y., Freeman, R., Charney, A. W., Nadkarni, G. Stefanija, A. P., and Pierson, J. 2023. “Algorithmic Strömbäck, J., Boomgaarden, H., Broda, E., Dams- N., and Klang, E. 2024. “Large Language Models Are Governmentality, Digital Sovereignty, and Agency Af- tra, A., Lindgren, E., Tsfati, Y., and Vliegenthart, R. Poor Medical Coders—Benchmarking of Medical Code fordances: Extending the Possible Fields of Action.” 2022. “From Low-Choice to High-Choice Media En- Querying.” NEJM AI 1(5): AIdbp2300040. Weizenbaum Journal of the Digital Society 3(2). vironments: Implications for Knowledge Resistance.” Knowledge Resistance in High-Choice Information En- Soto, M., Martinez-Gutierrez, J., Momany, M., Ca- Steiger, M., Bharucha, T. J., Venkatagiri, S., Riedl, vironments. Routledge. purro, D., Spode, F. C., Cea, E., Mergudich, T., and M. J., and Lease, M. 2021. “The Psychological Well- Puschel, K. 2018. “Preferences of Underserved Chil- Being of Content Moderators: The Emotional Labor of Stuart, J., and Scott, R. 2021. “The Measure of Online ean Women on a Mobile Technology Intervention for Commercial Moderation and Avenues for Improving Disinhibition (MOD): Assessing Perceptions of Reduc- Cervical Cancer Screening: Qualitative Study.” JMIR Support.” Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on tions in Restraint in the Online Environment.” Comput- mHealth and uHealth 6(11): e9494. Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–14. ers in Human Behavior 114: 106534. Spada, C., Piccirelli, S., Hassan, C., Ferrari, C., Toth, Stein, M. A., and Lazar, J. 2021. Accessible Technol- Stuhler, O., Stoltz, D. S., and Martin, J. L. 2023. E., González-Suárez, B., Keuchel, M., and others. ogy and the Developing World. Oxford, UK: Oxford “Meaning and Machines.” In Borch, C., and Pardo-Guer- 2024. “AI-Assisted Capsule Endoscopy Reading in Sus- University Press. ra, J. P., (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of the Sociology pected Small Bowel Bleeding: A Multicentre Prospec- of Machine Learning. Oxford University Press. tive Study.” The Lancet Digital Health 6(5): e345–e353. Stewart, A. J., Arechar, A. A., Rand, D. G., and Plot- kin, J. B. 2024. “The Distorting Effects of Producer Stypinska, J. 2023. “AI Ageism: A Critical Roadmap Span, P. 2025. “Telemedicine for Seniors Gets a Last- Strategies: Why Engagement Does Not Reveal Con- for Studying Age Discrimination and Exclusion in Digi- Minute Reprieve.” The New York Times. https://www sumer Preferences for Misinformation.” Proceedings of talized Societies.” AI & Society 38(2): 665–677. .nytimes.com/2025/01/05/health/telemedicine-seniors the National Academy of Sciences 121(10): e2315195121. -medicare.html. Accessed 17 January 2025. Su, H., Chen, R., Tang, S., Zheng, X., Li, J., Yin, Z., Stewart, F. 2013. “Capabilities and Human Develop- Ouyang, W., and Dong, N. 2024. “Two Heads Are Bet- Spence, M. 2024. “AI’s Promise for the Global Econo- ment: Beyond the Individual - the Critical Role of Social ter Than One: A Multi-Agent System Has the Potential my.” Finance & Development, IMF. Institutions and Social Competencies.” Human Devel- to Improve Scientific Idea Generation.” arXiv preprint opment Report Office Occasional Paper 2013/03, Unit- arXiv:2410.09403. Sperling, K., Stenliden, L., Nissen, J., and Heintz, F. ed Nations Development Programme, New York. 2022. “Still W(AI)ting for the Automation of Teaching: Suhara, Y., Wang, X., Angelidis, S., and Tan, W.-C. An Exploration of Machine Learning in Swedish Primary Stiglitz, J. E. 2021. “From Manufacturing-Led Export 2020. “OpinionDigest: A Simple Framework for Opin- Education Using Actor-Network Theory.” European Growth to a Twenty-First Century Inclusive Growth ion Summarization.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005 .01901. Journal of Education 57(4): 584–600. Strategy: Explaining the Demise of a Successful Growth Model and What to Do About It.” In Gradín, C., Leib- Sui, P., Duede, E., Wu, S., and So, R. J. 2024. “Con- Spiel, K., Frauenberger, C., Keyes, O., and Fitzpat- brandt, M., and Tarp, F., (eds.), Inequality in the Devel- fabulation: The Surprising Value of Large Language rick, G. 2019. “Agency of Autistic Children in Technol- oping World. Oxford University Press. Model Hallucinations.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04175. ogy Research: A Critical Literature Review.” ACM Trans- actions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 26(6): Stiles, E., and Cui, X. 2010. “Workings of Collective Suleyman, M. 2023. The Coming Wave: Technology, 1–40. Intelligence within Open Source Communities.” Ad- Power, and the Twenty-First Century’s Greatest Dilem- vances in Social Computing: Proceedings of the Third ma. New York: Crown. Srivastava, A., Rastogi, A., Rao, A., Shoeb, A. A. M., International Conference on Social Computing, Behav- Abid, A., Fisch, A., Brown, A. R., and others. 2022. ioral Modeling, and Prediction, Bethesda, MD, 30–31 Summerfield, C. 2025. These Strange New Minds: “Beyond the Imitation Game: Quantifying and Extrapo- March, Springer, 282–289. How AI Learned to Talk and What It Means. New York: lating the Capabilities of Language Models.” arXiv pre- Viking Press. print arXiv:2206.04615. Stobierski, T. 2020. “What Are Network Effects?” Harvard Business School Online. https://online.hbs.edu Summerfield, C., Argyle, L., Bakker, M., Collins, T., Stadler, M., Bannert, M., and Sailer, M. 2024. “Cog- /blog/post/what-are-network-effects. Durmus, E., Eloundou, T., Gabriel, I., and others. nitive Ease at a Cost: LLMs Reduce Mental Effort but 2024. “How Will Advanced AI Systems Impact Democ- racy?” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.06729. REFERENCES 257 Sun, L., Liu, D., Wang, M., Han, Y., Zhang, Y., Zhou, Tan, S. C., Wijekumar, K., Hong, H., Olmanson, J., Personalized Persuasion.” Proceedings of the National B., and Ren, Y. 2025. “Taming Unleashed Large Lan- Twomey, R., and Sinha, T. 2024. “Guest Editorial Edu- Academy of Sciences 121(43): e2418005121. guage Models with Blockchain for Massive Personal- cation in the World of ChatGPT and Generative AI.” IEEE ized Reliable Healthcare.” IEEE Journal of Biomedical Transactions on Learning Technologies 17: 2008–2010. Tejani, A. S., Ng, Y. S., Xi, Y., and Rayan, J. C. 2024. and Health Informatics. “Understanding and Mitigating Bias in Imaging Artificial Tan, T. X., and Zhou, Y. 2022. “Screen Time and Adhd Intelligence.” RadioGraphics 44(5): e230067. Sun, L., Yuan, Y., Yao, Y., Li, Y., Zhang, H., Xie, X., Behaviors in Chinese Children: Findings from Longitu- Wang, X., Luo, F., and Stillwell, D. 2024. “Large dinal and Cross-Sectional Data.” Journal of Attention Tessler, M. H., Bakker, M. A., Jarrett, D., Sheahan, Language Models Show Both Individual and Collec- Disorders 26(13): 1725–1737. H., Chadwick, M. J., Koster, R., Evans, G., and oth- tive Creativity Comparable to Humans.” arXiv preprint ers. 2024. “AI Can Help Humans Find Common arXiv:2412.03151. Tanaka, T. S. T., Heuvelink, G. B. M., Mieno, T., and Ground in Democratic Deliberation.” science 386(6719): Bullock, D. S. 2024. “Can Machine Learning Models eadq2852. Sun, Y., Huang, J., Ao, Z., Lao, D., and Xin, Q. 2019. Provide Accurate Fertilizer Recommendations?” Preci- “Deep Learning Approaches for the Mapping of Tree sion Agriculture 25(4): 1839–1856. Teutloff, O., Einsiedler, J., Kässi, O., Braesemann, Species Diversity in a Tropical Wetland Using Airborne F., Mishkin, P., and del Rio-Chanona, R. M. 2025. Lidar and High-Spatial-Resolution Remote Sensing Im- Tandon, A., and Rathi, A. 2021. “Fault Lines at the “Winners and Losers of Generative AI: Early Evidence ages.” Forests 10(11): 1047. Front Lines: Care Work and Digital Platforms in South of Shifts in Freelancer Demand.” Journal of Economic and Southeast Asia.” Friedrich Ebert Stiftung. Behavior & Organization: 106845. Suran, S., Pattanaik, V., Kurvers, R., Hallin, C. A., De Liddo, A., Krimmer, R., and Draheim, D. 2022. Tandon, A., and Sekharan, A. 2022. “Labouring (on) Theopilus, Y., Al Mahmud, A., Davis, H., and Octa- “Building Global Societies on Collective Intelligence: the App: Agency and Organisation of Work in the Plat- via, J. R. 2024. “Preventive Interventions for Internet Challenges and Opportunities.” Digital Government: form Economy.” Gender & Development 30(3): 687–706. Addiction in Young Children: Systematic Review.” JMIR Research and Practice 3(4): 1–6. Mental Health 11(1): e56896. Tang, A. 2024. “Democracy in the Age of AI.” RSA Suresh Babu, S., and Dhakshina Moorthy, A. 2024. Journal. https://www.thersa.org/rsa-journal/2024/issue Thiagarajan, T., Newson, J., and Swaminathan, S. “Application of Artificial Intelligence in Adaptation of -2/democracy-in-the-age-of-ai. 2025. “An Exploration of the Impact of Smartphones Gamification in Education: A Literature Review.” Com- in Childhood on Mind Health in Young Adulthood.” Un- puter Applications in Engineering Education 32(1): Tang, C., Yi, W., Xu, M., Jin, Y., Zhang, Z., Chen, X., published background paper, Human Development e22683. Liao, C., and others. 2025. “A Deep Learning–Enabled Report Office, UNDP, New York. Smart Garment for Accurate and Versatile Monitoring Suresh, H., and Guttag, J. 2021. “A Framework for Un- of Sleep Conditions in Daily Life.” Proceedings of the Thompson, C. 2024. “Generational AI: Digital Inclu- derstanding Sources of Harm Throughout the Machine National Academy of Sciences 122(7): e2420498122. sion for Aging Populations.” https://www.atlanticcouncil Learning Life Cycle.” Proceedings of the 1st ACM Con- .org/in-depth-research-reports/report/generational-ai ference on Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mecha- Tanno, R., Barrett, D. G. T., Sellergren, A., Ghaisas, -digital-inclusion-for-aging-populations/. Accessed 12 nisms, and Optimization, 1–9. S., Dathathri, S., See, A., Welbl, J., and others. 2024. June 2024. “Collaboration between Clinicians and Vision–Lan- Surowiecki, J. 2005. The Wisdom of Crowds. New guage Models in Radiology Report Generation.” Nature Thornhill, J. 2025. “Help Is Coming in the AI Copyright York: Anchor Books. Medicine 30: 1134–1142. Wars.” Financial Times, 27 February. https://www.ft.com /content/b98979ba-6ae7-4490-97a9-127381440b1f. Svanberg, M., Li, W., Fleming, M., Goehring, B., and Tappin, B. M., Pennycook, G., and Rand, D. G. 2021. Thompson, N. 2024. “Beyond AI Exposure: Which “Rethinking the Link between Cognitive Sophistication Ticona, J., and Mateescu, A. 2018. “Trusted Strang- Tasks Are Cost-Effective to Automate with Computer and Politically Motivated Reasoning.” Journal of Experi- ers: Carework Platforms’ Cultural Entrepreneurship in Vision?” Available at SSRN 4700751. mental Psychology: General 150(6): 1095. the on-Demand Economy.” New Media & Society 20(11): 4384–4404. Swartz, E., Denecke, C., and Scheepers, C. B. 2023. Tappin, B. M., Wittenberg, C., Hewitt, L. B., Berinsky, “Following the Money: Leapfrogging through and with A. J., and Rand, D. G. 2023. “Quantifying the Poten- Tien, P. W., Wei, S., Darkwa, J., Wood, C., and Calau- Entrepreneurial Growth Companies in Ghana, Kenya, tial Persuasive Returns to Political Microtargeting.” tit, J. K. 2022. “Machine Learning and Deep Learning Nigeria and South Africa.” Technological Leapfrogging Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences Methods for Enhancing Building Energy Efficiency and and Innovation in Africa. Edward Elgar Publishing. 120(25): e2216261120. Indoor Environmental Quality – a Review.” Energy and AI 10: 100198. Swift, H. J., and Chasteen, A. L. 2021. “Ageism in the Tavares, M., and Rein, B. 2024. “The Virtual Disen- Time of Covid-19.” Group Processes & Intergroup Rela- gagement Hypothesis: A Neurophysiological Frame- Tirole, J. 2023. “Competition and the Industrial Chal- tions 24(2): 246–252. work for Reduced Empathy on Social Media.” Cognitive, lenge for the Digital Age.” Annual Review of Economics Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience 24(6): 965–971. 15(Volume 15, 2023): 573–605. Szatmári, G., Pásztor, L., and Heuvelink, G. B. M. 2021. “Estimating Soil Organic Carbon Stock Change Taylor, A. 2018. “The Automation Charade.” https:// Todorović, V., Pešterac, A., and Tomić, N. 2019. “The at Multiple Scales Using Machine Learning and Multi- logicmag.io/failure/the-automation-charade/. Accessed Impact of Automated Trading Systems on Financial variate Geostatistics.” Geoderma 403: 115356. 11 March 2025. Market Stability.” Facta Universitatis, Series: Economics and Organization, 255–268. Szymanski, N. J., Rendy, B., Fei, Y., Kumar, R. E., He, Taylor, I. 2023. “Justice by Algorithm: The Limits of AI T., Milsted, D., McDermott, M. J., and others. 2023. in Criminal Sentencing.” Criminal Justice Ethics 42(3): Toner-Rodgers, A. 2024. “Artificial Intelligence, Scien- “An Autonomous Laboratory for the Accelerated Syn- 193–213. tific Discovery, and Product Innovation.” arXiv preprint thesis of Novel Materials.” Nature 624(7990): 86–91. arXiv:2412.17866. Te Hiku Media. 2025. “Te Hiku Media.” Kaitaia. https:// Tagesschau. 2023. “Nachlässige Moderation, Gering- tehiku.nz/. Tonja, A. L., Dossou, B. F., Ojo, J., Rajab, J., Thior, er Schutz.” https://www.tagesschau.de/investigativ/ndr F., Wairagala, E. P., Aremu, A., and others. 2024. /schutz-kinder-jugendliche-internet-tik-tok-instagram Tech Business News. 2023. “ChatGPT May Lead to “Inkubalm: A Small Language Model for Low-Resource -x-100.html. Accessed 11 December 2023. the Downfall of Education and Critical Thinking.” https:// African Languages.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.17024. www.techbusinessnews.com.au/blog/chatgpt-may Takita, H., Kabata, D., Walston, S. L., Tatekawa, H., -lead-to-the-downfall-of-eduction-and-critical-thinking/. Topol, E. J. 2023. “As Artificial Intelligence Goes Saito, K., Tsujimoto, Y., Miki, Y., and Ueda, D. 2025. Accessed 5 March 2024. Multimodal, Medical Applications Multiply.” Science “A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Diagnostic 381(6663): eadk6139. Performance Comparison between Generative AI and Teeny, J. D., and Matz, S. C. 2024. “We Need to Un- Physicians.” NPJ Digital Medicine 8(1): 175. derstand “When” Not “If” Generative AI Can Enhance 258 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Topol, E. J. 2024a. “Medical Forecasting.” Science Tubaro, P. 2021. “Disembedded or Deeply Embed- Ueda, D., Kakinuma, T., Fujita, S., Kamagata, K., 384(6698): eadp7977. ded? A Multi-Level Network Analysis of Online Labour Fushimi, Y., Ito, R., Matsui, Y., and others. 2024. Platforms.” Sociology 55(5): 927–944. “Fairness of Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare: Review Topol, E. J. 2024b. “The Revolution in High-Through- and Recommendations.” Japanese Journal of Radiol- put Proteomics and AI.” Science 385(6716): eads5749. Tucker, C. 2025. “How Does Competition Policy Need ogy 42(1): 3–15. to Change in a World of Artificial Intelligence?” Oxford Törnberg, P. 2018. “Echo Chambers and Viral Misinfor- Review of Economic Policy 40(4): 834–842. Ugander, J., and Epstein, Z. 2024. “The Art of Ran- mation: Modeling Fake News as Complex Contagion.” domness: Sampling and Chance in the Age of Algorith- PLOS ONE 13(9): e0203958–e0203958. Tuia, D., Kellenberger, B., Beery, S., Costelloe, B. R., mic Reproduction.” Harvard Data Science Review 6(4). Zuffi, S., Risse, B., Mathis, A., and others. 2022. “Per- Tortoise Media 2025. “The Global AI Index.” Tortoise spectives in Machine Learning for Wildlife Conserva- Uhls, Y. T., Michikyan, M., Morris, J., Garcia, D., Small, Media. tion.” Nature Communications 13(1): 792. G. W., Zgourou, E., and Greenfield, P. M. 2014. “Five Days at Outdoor Education Camp without Screens Im- Toupin, S. 2024. “Shaping Feminist Artificial Intelli- Tuomi, I. 2019. “The Impact of Artificial Intelligence proves Preteen Skills with Nonverbal Emotion Cues.” gence.” New Media & Society 26(1): 580–595. on Learning, Teaching, and Education: Policies for Computers in Human Behavior 39: 387–392. the Future. JRC Science for Policy Report.” European Touvron, H., Martin, L., Stone, K., Albert, P., Alma- Commission. Umbach, R., Henry, N., Beard, G. F., and Berryessa, hairi, A., Babaei, Y., Bashlykov, N., and others. 2023. C. M. 2024. “Non-Consensual Synthetic Intimate Imag- “Llama 2: Open Foundation and Fine-Tuned Chat Mod- Turing, A. 1950. “Computing Machinery and Intelli- ery: Prevalence, Attitudes, and Knowledge in 10 Coun- els.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288. gence.” Mind 59: 433–460. https://doi.org/10.1093/mind tries.” Proceedings of the 2024 CHI Conference on Hu- /LIX.236.433. man Factors in Computing Systems, 1–20. Touzet, C. 2023. “Using AI to Support People with Dis- ability in the Labour Market: Opportunities and Chal- Turing, A. M. 1937. “On Computable Numbers, with an UN (United Nations) and ILO (International Labour lenges.” OECD Artificial Intelligence Papers 7, OECD Application to the Entscheidungsproblem.” Proceed- Organization). 2024. Mind the AI Divide: Shaping a Publishing, Paris. ings of the London Mathematical Society s2-42(1): Global Perspective on the Future of Work. New York: 230–265. UN. Towe-Goodman, N., McArthur, K. L., Willoughby, M., Swingler, M. M., Wychgram, C., Just, A. C., Kloog, I., Turki, A. T., Engelke, M., and Sobas, M. 2024. “Ad- UN (United Nations) and UNOHCHR (United Na- and others. 2024. “Green Space and Internalizing or vances in Decision Support for Diagnosis and Early tions Human Rights Office of the High Commis- Externalizing Symptoms among Children.” JAMA Net- Management of Acute Leukaemia.” The Lancet Digital sioner). 2011. “Guiding Principles on Business and work Open 7(4): e245742–e245742. Health 6(5): e300–e301. Human Rights: Implementing the United Nations ‘Pro- tect, Respect and Remedy’ Framework.” https://www Towfek, S., and Elkanzi, M. 2024. “A Review on the Turon, G., Arora, D., and Duran-Frigola, M. 2024. .ohchr.org/sites/default/files/documents/publications Role of Machine Learning in Predicting the Spread of “Infectious Disease Research Laboratories in Africa /guidingprinciplesbusinesshr_en.pdf. Accessed 14 Infectious Diseases.” Metaheuristic Optimization Re- Are Not Using AI Yet—Large Language Models May January 2025. view (MOR) 2(1): 14–27. Facilitate Adoption.” ACS Infectious Diseases 10(9): 3083–3085. UN (United Nations). 1989a. Convention on the Rights Toyokawa, W., Whalen, A., and Laland, K. N. 2019. of the Child. Human Rights Directorate. “Social Learning Strategies Regulate the Wisdom and Twenge, J. M., and Campbell, W. K. 2018. “Asso- Madness of Interactive Crowds.” Nature Human Be- ciations between Screen Time and Lower Psycho- UN (United Nations). 1989b. “Convention on the haviour 3(2): 183–193. logical Well-Being among Children and Adolescents: Rights of the Child. General Assembly Resolu- Evidence from a Population-Based Study.” Preventive tion 44/25.” https://www.ohchr.org/en/instruments Trammell, P., and Korinek, A. 2023. “Economic Medicine Reports 12: 271–283. -mechanisms/instruments/convention-rights-child. Ac- Growth under Transformative AI.” Working Paper 31815, cessed 28 March 2025. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Twenge, J. M., and Campbell, W. K. 2019. “Media Use MA. Is Linked to Lower Psychological Well-Being: Evidence UN (United Nations). 2024a. “A Global Digital Com- from Three Datasets.” Psychiatric Quarterly 90: 311–331. pact - an Open, Free, and Secure Digital Future for All.” Tranchero, M., Brenninkmeijer, C.-F., Murugan, A., https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/our-common and Nagaraj, A. 2024. Theorizing with Large Lan- Twenge, J. M., Haidt, J., Joiner, T. E., and Campbell, -agenda-policy-brief-gobal-digi-compact-en.pdf. Ac- guage Models. Working Paper 33033, National Bureau W. K. 2020. “Underestimating Digital Media Harm.” Na- cessed 11 March 2025. of Economic Research. ture Human Behaviour 4(4): 346–348. UN (United Nations). 2024b. “Global Digital Com- Treiman, L. S., Ho, C.-J., and Kool, W. 2024. “The Twenge, J. M., Haidt, J., Lozano, J., and Cummins, pact.” Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Tech- Consequences of AI Training on Human Decision- K. M. 2022. “Specification Curve Analysis Shows That nology. https://www.un.org/global-digital-compact/en. Making.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- Social Media Use Is Linked to Poor Mental Health, Es- Accessed 14 January 2025. ences 121(33): e2408731121. pecially among Girls.” Acta Psychologica 224: 103512. UN (United Nations). 2024c. Governing AI for Human- Tronto, J. 2020. Moral Boundaries: A Political Argu- Twenge, J., and Blanchflower, D. G. 2025. “Declining ity. New York: United Nations. ment for an Ethic of Care. Routledge. Life Satisfaction and Happiness among Young Adults in Six English-Speaking Countries.” Working Paper UN (United Nations). 2024d. “Transforming Care Sys- Trott, S., Jones, C., Chang, T., Michaelov, J., and Ber- 33490, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cam- tems in the Context of the Sustainable Development gen, B. 2023. “Do Large Language Models Know What bridge, MA. https://www.nber.org/papers/w33490. Ac- Goals and Our Common Agenda.” New York. Humans Know?” Cognitive Science 47(7): e13309. cessed 18 February 2025. UN Women (United Nations Entity for Gender Equal- Tsado, A. 2024. “Only Five Percent of Africa’s AI Talent Tzirides, A. O. 2022. “Informing Advanced Digital ity and the Empowerment of Women). 2023. “Path- Has the Compute Power It Needs.” https://www.undp Technologies’ Design for Refugee Language Education ways Towards Decent Work in the Digitally-Enabled .org/digital/blog/only-five-percent-africas-ai-talent-has in Greece.” Proceedings of the 16th International Con- Care Economy.” New York. -compute-power-it-needs. ference of the Learning Sciences-ICLS 2022: 1852– 1853. International Society of the Learning Sciences. UN Women (United Nations Entity for Gender Equal- Tsvetkova, M., Yasseri, T., Pescetelli, N., and Werner, https://repository.isls.org/bitstream/1/8606/1/ICLS2022 ity and the Empowerment of Women) and WHO T. 2024. “A New Sociology of Humans and Machines.” _1852-1853.pdf?__cf_chl_rt_tk=HPZMy__JmfuwLv (World Health Organization). 2023. “Technology- Nature Human Behaviour 8(10): 1864–1876. _zlKBkUu5LqaaNPGsHPN8z9UesjUc-1743510175 Facilitated Violence against Women: Taking Stock of -1.0.1.1-5uRbeuEacQDXhw_wvEN3StWQzCuMh Evidence and Data Collection.” New York. .jJrIHR7NAhaA8. Accessed 6 May 2024. REFERENCES 259 UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific -09/civil-rights-implications-of-frt_0.pdf. Accessed 30 Development). 2023. State of Commodity Depen- and Cultural Organization). 2022. “M-Shule SMS December 2024. dence 2023. Geneva: UNCTAD. Learning & Training, Kenya.” https://www.uil.unesco.org /en/litbase/m-shule-sms-learning-training-kenya. Ac- US Department of Homeland Security. 2024. “Artifi- UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and cessed 23 March 2025. cial Intelligence and Combatting Online Child Sexual Development). 2024. Trade and Development Report Exploitation and Abuse.” https://www.dhs.gov/sites 2024: Rethinking Development in the Age of Discon- UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and /default/files/2024-04/24_0408_k2p_genai-bulletin tent. Geneva: UNCTAD. Cultural Organization). 2023. “Your Opinion Does .pdf. Accessed 1 October 2024. Not Matter Anyway: Exposing Technology-Facilitated UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Gender-Based Violence in an Era of Generative AI.” Paris. US Federal Bureau of Investigation. 2024. “Elder Development). 2025. Technology and Innovation Re- Fraud Report 2023.” https://www.ic3.gov/AnnualReport port 2025: Inclusive Artificial Intelligence for Develop- UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and /Reports/2023_IC3ElderFraudReport.pdf. Accessed 27 ment. Geneva: UNCTAD. Cultural Organization). 2024a. “The Gender Gap in February 2025. Science: Status and Trends, February 2024.” Paris. UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic US Government Accountability Office. 2014. “Ad- and Social Affairs). 2024a. “The Sustainable Develop- UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and vanced Imaging Technology: TSA Needs Additional In- ment Goals Report 2024.” Cultural Organization). 2024b. “Technology on Her formation before Procuring Nextgeneration Systems.” Terms.” Paris. https://www.gao.gov/assets/gao-14-357.pdf. Accessed UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic 27 December 2024. and Social Affairs). 2024b. “World Population Pros- UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and pects 2024 Summary of Results.” Cultural Organization). 2024c. “UNESCO Women for US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering Ethical AI: Outlook Study on Artificial Intelligence and and Medicine 2022. Human-AI Teaming: State-of-the- UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic Gender.” Paris. Art and Research Needs. Washington, DC: The Nation- and Social Affairs). 2024c. World Population Pros- al Academies Press. pects: The 2024 Revision. New York. https://population UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and .un.org/wpp/. Accessed 1 August 2024. Cultural Organization). 2024d. “Global Education US National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, Monitoring Report, 2024/5, Leadership in Education: and Medicine 2024. Artificial Intelligence and the Fu- UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic Lead for Learning.” Paris: UNESCO. ture of Work. Washington, DC: The National Academies and Social Affairs). 2024d. “Disability and Develop- Press. ment Report 2024: Accelerating the Realisation of the UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Sustainable Development Goals by, for, and with Per- Cultural Organization) Institute for Statistics. 2024. US National Center for Education Statistics. 2013. sons with Disabilities.” New York. UIS Developer Portal, Bulk Data Download Service. “The Nation’s Report Card: Trends in Academic Prog- https://apiportal.uis.unesco.org/bdds. Accessed 12 ress 2012.” Institute of Education Sciences, U.S. Depart- UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). September 2024. ment of Education,Washington, DC. https://nces.ed.gov 2023. “2023 Gender Social Norms Index (GSNI): /nationsreportcard/subject/publications/main2012/pdf Breakingdown Gender Biases: Shifting Social Norms UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2012. /2013456.pdf. Accessed 27 October 2024. Towards Gender Equality.” New York: Human Develop- “Children’s Rights and Business Principles.” https:// ment Report Office. www .unicef.org/documents/childrens-rights-and- US Office of the Surgeon General. 2023. “Social Me- business -principles. Accessed 14 January 2025. dia and Youth Mental Health.” The US Surgeon Gen- UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). eral’s Advisory. https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files 2024a. “2024 Global Multidimensional Poverty Index UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2023. /sg-youth-mental-health-social-media-advisory.pdf. Ac- (MPI): Poverty amid Conflict.” New York. https://hdr.undp “Online Risk and Harm for Children in Eastern and cessed 10 January 2025. .org/content/2024-global-multidimensional-poverty Southern Africa “ https://www.unicef.org/innocenti -index-mpi#/indicies/MPI. Accessed 22 January 2025. /media/3841/file/Online-Risks-Harm-Children-ESA Uzokov, J., Alyavi, A., Alyavi, B., and Abdullaev, A. -2023.pdf. Accessed 1 November 2024. 2024. How Artificial Intelligence Can Assist with Isch- UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). aemic Heart Disease. Oxford University Press UK. 2024b. Human Development Report 2023/24. Break- UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2024. ing the Gridlock: Reimagining Cooperation in a Polar- “Early Childhood Education.” https://data.unicef.org Vaccaro, M., Almaatouq, A., and Malone, T. 2024. ized World. New York: UNDP. /topic/early-childhood-development/early-childhood “When Combinations of Humans and AI Are Useful: A -education/. Accessed 11 December 2024. Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.” Nature Human UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). Behaviour 8(12): 2293–2303. 2025. “Human Development Index (HDI).” https://hdr United Nations Statistics Division. 2025. National .undp.org/data-center/human-development-index Accounts Main Aggregates Database. http://unstats.un Vafa, K., Chen, J. Y., Kleinberg, J., Mullainathan, S., #/indicies/HDI. Accessed 31 March 2025. .org/unsd/snaama. Accessed 17 January 2025. and Rambachan, A. 2024. “Evaluating the World Mod- el Implicit in a Generative Model.” arXiv preprint arXiv: UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific Unruh, C. F., Haid, C., Johannes, F., and Büthe, T. 2406.03689. and Cultural Organization). 2019. “Artificial Intelli- 2022. “Human Autonomy in Algorithmic Management.” gence in Education, Compendium of Promising Initia- Proceedings of the 2022 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Vafa, K., Chen, J., Rambachan, A., Kleinberg, J., and tives: Mobile Learning Week 2019.” https://iite.unesco Ethics, and Society. https://philpapers.org/rec/DAIPOT Mullainathan, S. 2024. “Evaluating the World Model .org/publications/ai-in-ed-compendium-of-promising -2. Accessed 4 April 2025. Implicit in a Generative Model.” Advances in Neural In- -initiatives-mlw-2019/. Accessed 8 November 2023. formation Processing Systems 37: 26941–26975. Urbán, J. F., Stefanou, P., and Pons, J. A. 2025. “Un- UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific veiling the Optimization Process of Physics Informed Vaid, S. S., Kroencke, L., Roshanaei, M., Talaifar, S., and Cultural Organization). 2020. “Online Violence Neural Networks: How Accurate and Competitive Can Hancock, J. T., Back, M. D., Gosling, S. D., Ram, N., against Women Journalists: A Global Snapshort of In- Pinns Be?” Journal of Computational Physics 523: and Harari, G. M. 2024. “Variation in Social Media cidence and Impacts.” Paris. 113656. Sensitivity across People and Contexts.” Scientific Re- ports 14(1): 6571. UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific Urbina, F., Lentzos, F., Invernizzi, C., and Ekins, S. and Cultural Organization). 2021a. “The Race against 2022. “Dual Use of Artificial-Intelligence-Powered Drug Valencia, S., Cave, R., Kallarackal, K., Seaver, K., Time for Smarter Development.” Paris. Discovery.” Nature Machine Intelligence 4(3): 189–191. Terry, M., and Kane, S. K. 2023. “‘The Less I Type, the Better:’ How AI Language Models Can Enhance or Im- UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and US Commission on Civil Rights. 2024. “The Civil pede Communication for AAC Users.” Proceedings of Cultural Organization). 2021b. “Recommendation on Rights Implications of the Federal Use of Facial Rec- the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com- the Ethics of Artificial Intelligence.” Paris: UNESCO. ognition Technology.” https://www.usccr.gov/files/2024 puting Systems, 1–14. 260 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Valenzuela, A., Puntoni, S., Hoffman, D., Castelo, 2017. “Attention Is All You Need.” Advances in Neural Virnodkar, S. S., Pachghare, V. K., Patil, V. C., and N., De Freitas, J., Dietvorst, B., Hildebrand, C., and Information Processing Systems 30. Jha, S. K. 2020. “Remote Sensing and Machine Learn- others. 2024. “How Artificial Intelligence Constrains ing for Crop Water Stress Determination in Various the Human Experience.” Journal of the Association for V-Dem Institute. 2025. https://www.v-dem.net/. Ac- Crops: A Critical Review.” Precision Agriculture 21(5): Consumer Research 9(3): 241–256. cessed 28 April 2025. 1121–1155. Valkenburg, P. M. 2022. “Social Media Use and Well- Veale, M., Matus, K., and Gorwa, R. 2023. “AI and Vlasceanu, M., and Doell, K. C., and Bak-Coleman, J. Being: What We Know and What We Need to Know.” Global Governance: Modalities, Rationales, Ten- B., and Todorova, B., and Berkebile-Weinberg, M. M., Current Opinion in Psychology 45: 101294. sions.” Annual Review of Law and Social Science 19(1): and Grayson, S. J., and Patel, Y., and others. 2024. 255–275. “Addressing Climate Change with Behavioral Science: Vallor, S. 2024. The AI Mirror: How to Reclaim Our A Global Intervention Tournament in 63 Countries.” Sci- Humanity in an Age of Machine Thinking. Oxford Uni- Velasquez, A. 2023. “Production Technology, Market ence Advances 10(6): 217–217. versity Press. Power, and the Decline of the Labor Share.” Working Paper 2023/032, International Monetary Fund, Wash- Voelz, V. A., Pande, V. S., and Bowman, G. R. 2023. Vallstrom, D. 2024. “Cooperative Evolutionary Pres- ington, DC. “Folding@ Home: Achievements from over 20 Years of sure and Diminishing Returns Might Explain the Fermi Citizen Science Herald the Exascale Era.” Biophysical Paradox: On What Super-AIs Are Like.” arXiv preprint Vélez, N., Christian, B., Hardy, M., Thompson, B. D., journal 122(14): 2852–2863. arXiv:2404.03685. and Griffiths, T. L. 2023. “How Do Humans Overcome Individual Computational Limitations by Working To- Vogell, H., Coryne, H., and Little, R. 2022. “Rent Go- Van Bavel, J. J., Robertson, C. E., Del Rosario, K., Ras- gether?” Cognitive Science 47(1): e13232. ing Up? One Company’s Algorithm Could Be Why.” Pro mussen, J., and Rathje, S. 2024. “Social Media and Publica. Morality.” Annual Review of Psychology 75(1): 311–340. Véliz, C. 2019. “Three Things Digital Ethics Can Learn from Medical Ethics.” Nature Electronics 2(8): 316–318. Voigt, P., and Von dem Bussche, A. 2017. The EU van der Weij, T., Hofstätter, F., Jaffe, O., Brown, S. General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR): A Practi- F., and Ward, F. R. 2024. “AI Sandbagging: Language Véliz, C. 2021. “Moral Zombies: Why Algorithms Are cal Guide, 1st Ed. Cham, Switzerland: Springer Interna- Models Can Strategically Underperform on Evalua- Not Moral Agents.” AI & Society 36(2): 487–497. tional Publishing. tions.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07358. Vergeer, M. 2020. “Artificial Intelligence in the Dutch Voinea, C., Wangmo, T., and Vică, C. 2024. “Pater- van Klink, R., August, T., Bas, Y., Bodesheim, P., Press: An Analysis of Topics and Trends.” Communicat- nalistic AI: The Case of Aged Care.” Humanities and Bonn, A., Fossøy, F., Høye, T. T., and others. 2022. ing Artificial Intelligence (AI). Routledge. Social Sciences Communications 11(1): 1–9. “Emerging Technologies Revolutionise Insect Ecology and Monitoring.” Trends in Ecology & Evolution 37(10): Verhoef, L. A., Budde, B. W., Chockalingam, C., Volenik, A. 2024. “A Handful of Big Tech Companies 872–885. García Nodar, B., and van Wijk, A. J. M. 2018. “The Surged by $8 Trillion in Market Value since ChatGPT’s Effect of Additive Manufacturing on Global Energy De- Launch – Marking a New Era.” Yahoo Finance, 29 van Kolfschooten, H. 2023. “The AI Cycle of Health mand: An Assessment Using a Bottom-up Approach.” December. Inequity and Digital Ageism: Mitigating Biases through Energy Policy 112: 349–360. the EU Regulatory Framework on Medical Devices.” Volokh, E. 2023. “Large Libel Models? Liability for AI Journal of Law and the Biosciences 10(2): 1–23. Verhoogen, E. 2023. “Firm-Level Upgrading in Devel- Output.” Journal of Free Speech Law 3: 489. oping Countries.” Journal of Economic Literature 61(4): van Oosterhout, C. 2024. “AI-Informed Conservation 1410–1464. von Eschenbach, W. J. 2021. “Transparency and the Genomics.” Heredity 132(1): 1–4. Black Box Problem: Why We Do Not Trust AI.” Philoso- Verma, P., and Tan, S. 2024. “A Bottle of Water Per phy & Technology 34(4): 1607–1622. Van Wynsberghe, A. 2021. “Sustainable AI: AI for Email: The Hidden Environmental Costs of Using AI Sustainability and the Sustainability of AI.” AI and Ethics Chatbots: AI Bots Generate a Lot of Heat, and Keep- von Schenk, A., Klockmann, V., and Köbis, N. 2025. 1(3): 213–218. ing Their Computer Servers Running Exacts a Toll.” The “Social Preferences toward Humans and Machines: A Washington Post. Systematic Experiment on the Role of Machine Pay- Vanden Abeele, M. M., Abels, M., and Hendrickson, offs.” Perspectives on Psychological Science 20(1): A. T. 2020. “Are Parents Less Responsive to Young Vidgen, B., Agrawal, A., Ahmed, A. M., Akinwande, 165–181. Children When They Are on Their Phones? A System- V., Al-Nuaimi, N., Alfaraj, N., Alhajjar, E., and others. atic Naturalistic Observation Study.” Cyberpsychology, 2024. “Introducing V0.5 of the AI Safety Benchmark Wachter, R. M., and Brynjolfsson, E. 2024. “Will Gen- Behavior, and Social Networking 23(6): 363–370. from Mlcommons.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12241. erative Artificial Intelligence Deliver on Its Promise in Health Care?” JAMA 331(1): 65–69. Varian, H. R. 2010. “Computer Mediated Transactions.” Villalobos, P., Ho, A., Sevilla, J., Besiroglu, T., Heim, American Economic Review 100(2): 1–10. L., and Hobbhahn, M. 2024. “Will We Run out of Data? Wachter, S., Mittelstadt, B., and Russell, C. 2024. “Do Limits of LLM Scaling Based on Human-Generated Large Language Models Have a Legal Duty to Tell the Varnum, M. E. W., Baumard, N., Atari, M., and Gray, Data.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.04325. Truth?” Royal Society Open Science 11(8): 240197. K. 2024. “Large Language Models Based on Historical Text Could Offer Informative Tools for Behavioral Sci- Villar, J. R., González, S., Sedano, J., Chira, C., and Wagner, C., Strohmaier, M., Olteanu, A., Kıcıman, E., ence.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- Trejo-Gabriel-Galan, J. M. 2015. “Improving Human Contractor, N., and Eliassi-Rad, T. 2021. “Measuring ences 121(42): e2407639121. Activity Recognition and Its Application in Early Stroke Algorithmically Infused Societies.” Nature 595(7866): Diagnosis.” International Journal of Neural Systems 197–204. Varoquaux, G., Luccioni, A. S., and Whittaker, M. 25(04): 1450036. 2024. “Hype, Sustainability, and the Price of the Big- Wajcman, J. 2010. “Feminist Theories of Technology.” ger-Is-Better Paradigm in AI.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409 Vincent-Lancrin, S., and Van der Vlies, R. 2020. Cambridge Journal of Economics 34(1): 143–152. .14160. “Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Education: Promises and Challenges.” OECD Education Working Wall, I., and Hedlund, K. 2016. “Localisation and Lo- Vásárhelyi, O., Zakhlebin, I., Milojević, S., and Hor- Paper 218, OECD Publishing, Paris. https://www.oecd cally-Led Crisis Response: A Literature Review.” Local vát, E.-Á. 2021. “Gender Inequities in the Online Dis- .org/en/publications/trustworthy-artificial-intelligence-ai to Global Protection (L2GB). Swiss Agency for Develop- semination of Scholars’ Work.” Proceedings of the Na- -in-education_a6c90fa9-en.html. Accessed 28 March ment and Cooperation. tional Academy of Sciences 118(39): e2102945118. 2025. Walsh, S. D., Sela, T., De Looze, M., Craig, W., Cos- Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Vipra, J., and West, S. M. 2023. “Computational Pow- ma, A., Harel-Fisch, Y., Boniel-Nissim, M., and oth- Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., and Polosukhin, I. er and AI.” AI Now Institute. ers. 2020. “Clusters of Contemporary Risk and Their Relationship to Mental Well-Being among 15-Year-Old REFERENCES 261 Adolescents across 37 Countries.” Journal of Adoles- Wang, X. Q., Chen, P., Chow, C. L., and Lau, D. 2023. Weizenbaum, J. 1976. Computer Power and Human cent Health 66(6, Supplement): S40–S49. “Artificial-Intelligence-Led Revolution of Construction Reason: From Judgment to Calculation. San Francisco, Materials: From Molecules to Industry 4.0.” Matter 6(6): CA: W. H. Freeman. Walton, N. 2022. “Digital Platforms as Entrepreneur- 1831–1859. ial Ecosystems and Drivers of Born-Global SMEs in Wendler, C., Veselovsky, V., Monea, G., and West, Emerging Economies.” International Entrepreneurship Wang, Y., Ma, W., Zhang, M., Liu, Y., and Ma, S. 2023. R. 2024. “Do Llamas Work in English? On the Latent in Emerging Markets. Routledge. “A Survey on the Fairness of Recommender Systems.” Language of Multilingual Transformers.” Proceedings ACM Computing Surveys 41(3): 1–43. of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Wan, J., Li, X., Dai, H.-N., Kusiak, A., Martinez-Gar- Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), cia, M., and Li, D. 2020. “Artificial-Intelligence-Driven Wang, Z., Bi, B., Pentyala, S. K., Ramnath, K., Chaud- 15366–15394. Customized Manufacturing Factory: Key Technologies, huri, S., Mehrotra, S., Mao, X.-B., and Asur, S. 2024. Applications, and Challenges.” Proceedings of the IEEE “A Comprehensive Survey of LLM Alignment Tech- Wenger, E., and Kenett, Y. 2025. “We’re Different, 109(4): 377–398. niques: RLHF, RLAIF, PPO, DPO and More.” arXiv pre- We’re the Same: Creative Homogeneity across LLMs.” print arXiv:2407.16216. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.19361. Wan, M. W., Fitch-Bunce, C., Heron, K., and Lester, E. 2021. “Infant Screen Media Usage and Social- Waring, T. M., Wood, Z. T., and Szathmáry, E. 2024. Wermelinger, M. 2023. “Using Github Copilot to Solve Emotional Functioning.” Infant Behavior and Develop- “Characteristic Processes of Human Evolution Caused Simple Programming Problems.” Proceedings of the ment 62: 101509. the Anthropocene and May Obstruct Its Global Solu- 54th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science tions.” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society Education, 172–178. Wang, A., Hertzmann, A., and Russakovsky, O. 2024. B 379(1893): 20220259. “Benchmark Suites Instead of Leaderboards for Evalu- Westberg, P. 2024. “ASML: Architecting Earth’s ating AI Fairness.” Patterns 5(11). Washington, J. 2023. “Combating Misinformation and Most Complex Machines.” https://quartr.com/insights Fake News: The Potential of AI and Media Literacy Edu- /company-research/asml-architecting-earths-most Wang, A., Kapoor, S., Barocas, S., and Narayanan, cation.” Available at SSRN 4580385. -complex-machines. A. 2024. “Against Predictive Optimization: On the Le- gitimacy of Decision-Making Algorithms That Optimize Watson, D. S., Mökander, J., and Floridi, L. 2024. Westfall, C. 2022. “Chatbots and Automations In- Predictive Accuracy.” ACM Journal on Responsible “Competing Narratives in AI Ethics: A Defense of So- crease Customer Service Frustrations for Consumers at Computing 1(1): Article 9. ciotechnical Pragmatism.” AI & society: 1–23. the Holidays.” Forbes, 7 December. https://www.forbes .com/sites/chriswestfall/2022/12/07/chatbots-and Wang, B., Chen, W., Pei, H., Xie, C., Kang, M., Zhang, WebAim. 2024. “The WebAim Million.” -automations-increase-customer-service-frustrations C., Xu, C., and others. 2023. “DecodingTrust: A Com- -for-consumers-at-the-holidays/?sh=5499e00532f6. prehensive Assessment of Trustworthiness in GPT WEF (World Economic Forum). 2023. “Global Gender Accessed 17 January 2024. Models.” NeurIPS. Gap Report 2023.” White, J., Fu, Q., Hays, S., Sandborn, M., Olea, C., Wang, F., and Preininger, A. 2019. “AI in Health: State Wei, J., Karina, N., Chung, H. W., Jiao, Y. J., Papay, Gilbert, H., Elnashar, A., Spencer-Smith, J., and of the Art, Challenges, and Future Directions.” Year- S., Glaese, A., Schulman, J., and Fedus, W. 2024. Schmidt, D. C. 2023. “A Prompt Pattern Catalog to book of medical informatics 28(01): 016–026. “Measuring Short-Form Factuality in Large Language Enhance Prompt Engineering with ChatGPT.” arXiv pre- Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.04368. print arXiv:2302.11382. Wang, M., Wang, M., Xu, X., Yang, L., Cai, D., and Yin, M. 2024. “Unleashing ChatGPT’s Power: A Case Study Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, Whitt, R. S. 2024. “Rise of the KnowMeBots: Promot- on Optimizing Information Retrieval in Flipped Class- F., Chi, E., Le, Q. V., and Zhou, D. 2022. “Chain-of- ing the Two Dimensions of AI Agency.” SSRN. rooms Via Prompt Engineering.” IEEE Transactions on Thought Prompting Elicits Reasoning in Large Lan- Learning Technologies 17: 629–641. guage Models.” Advances in Neural Information Pro- Whittlestone, J., Nyrup, R., Alexandrova, A., and cessing Systems 35: 24824–24837. Cave, S. 2019. “The Role and Limits of Principles in Wang, P., Zhang, L.-Y., Tzachor, A., and Chen, W.-Q. AI Ethics: Towards a Focus on Tensions.” Proceed- 2024. “E-Waste Challenges of Generative Artificial Wei, Q., Mease, P. J., Chiorean, M., Iles-Shih, L., ings of the 2019 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics, Intelligence.” Nature Computational Science 4(11): Matos, W. F., Baumgartner, A., Molani, S., and oth- and Society. Honolulu, HI: Association for Computing 818–823. ers. 2024. “Machine Learning to Understand Risks for Machinery. Severe Covid-19 Outcomes: A Retrospective Cohort Wang, S., Huang, S., Zhou, A., and Metaxa, D. 2024. Study of Immune-Mediated Inflammatory Diseases, WHO (World Health Organization) and UNICEF “Lower Quantity, Higher Quality: Auditing News Con- Immunomodulatory Medications, and Comorbidities (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2022. Global Re- tent and User Perceptions on Twitter/X Algorithmic in a Large Us Health-Care System.” The Lancet Digital port on Assistive Technology. Geneva: WHO. Versus Chronological Timelines.” arXiv preprint arXiv: Health 6(5): e309–e322. 2406.17097. WHO (World Health Organization). 2017. “Integrated Wei, W., Jörg, N., and and Rolf, S. 2024. “Leapfrog Care for Older People: Guidelines on Community- Wang, S., Petridis, S., Kwon, T., Ma, X., and Chilton, L. Logistics: Digital Trucking Platforms, Infrastructure, and Level Interventions to Manage Declines in Intrinsic B. 2023. “Popblends: Strategies for Conceptual Blend- Labor in Brazil and China.” Review of International Po- Capacity.” https://www.who.int/publications/i/item ing with Large Language Models.” Proceedings of the litical Economy 31(3): 930–954. /9789241550109. Accessed 30 March 2025. 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–19. Wei, W., Jörg, N., and and Rolf, S. 2024. “Leapfrog WHO (World Health Organization). 2021. “World Logistics: Digital Trucking Platforms, Infrastructure, and Health Statistics 2021: Monitoring Health for the SDGs, Wang, S., Xu, T., Li, H., Zhang, C., Liang, J., Tang, J., Labor in Brazil and China.” Review of International Po- Sustainable Development Goals.” Geneva: WHO. Yu, P. S., and Wen, Q. 2024. “Large Language Models litical Economy 31(3): 930–954. for Education: A Survey and Outlook.” arXiv preprint WHO (World Health Organization). 2022a. “Age- arXiv:2403.18105. Weidinger, L., Rauh, M., Marchal, N., Manzini, A., ism in Artificial Intelligence for Health “ WHO Pol- Hendricks, L. A., Mateos-Garcia, J., Bergman, S., icy Brief. https://www.who.int/publications/i/item Wang, T., Chen, J., Jia, Q., Wang, S., Fang, R., Wang, and others. 2023. “Sociotechnical Safety Evaluation /9789240040793. Accessed 15 July 2024. H., Gao, Z., and others. 2024. “Weaver: Foundation of Generative AI Systems.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310 Models for Creative Writing.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401 .11986. WHO (World Health Organization). 2022b. “Value Gen- .17268. der and Equity in the Global Health Workforce.” https:// Weise, K. 2025. “What Deepseek? Big Tech Keeps Its www.who.int/activities/value-gender-and-equity-in-the Wang, W., Ma, Z., Wang, Z., Wu, C., Chen, W., Li, X., AI Building Boom Alive.” New York Times, 8 February. -global-health-workforce. Accessed 11 March 2025. and Yuan, Y. 2025. “A Survey of LLM-Based Agents in Medicine: How Far Are We from Baymax?” arXiv pre- Weitzman, M. L. 1998. “Recombinant Growth.” The WHO (World Health Organization). 2023. Global Sta- print arXiv:2502.11211. Quarterly Journal of Economics 113(2): 331–360. tus Report on Road Safety 2023. Geneva. 262 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 WHO (World Health Organization). 2024. “World Outperforms the Best Radiologist.” PLOS ONE 10(8): Wu, P. Y., Nagler, J., Tucker, J. A., and Messing, S. Health Statistics 2024 Monitoring Health for the SDGs, 1–10. 2023. “Large Language Models Can Be Used to Esti- Sustainable Development Goals.” Geneva: WHO. mate the Latent Positions of Politicians.” arXiv preprint Wolfe, S. 2024-05-10 2024. Ohmconnect Combines arXiv:2303.12057. Widder, D. G., Whittaker, M., and West, S. M. 2024. with Google’s Nest Renew to Form Virtual Power Plant “Why ‘Open’ AI Systems Are Actually Closed, and Why Firm. Renewable Energy World [Online]. Wu, Z., Weber, T., and Müller, F. 2025. “One Does Not This Matters.” Nature 635(8040): 827–833. Simply Meme Alone: Evaluating Co-Creativity between Wölflein, G., Ferber, D., Truhn, D., Arandjelović, O., LLMs and Humans in the Generation of Humor.” arXiv Wiener, N. 1960. “Some Moral and Technical Conse- and Kather, J. N. 2025. “LLM Agents Making Agent preprint arXiv:2501.11433. quences of Automation: As Machines Learn They May Tools.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11705. Develop Unforeseen Strategies at Rates That Baffle Xi, Z., Chen, W., Guo, X., He, W., Ding, Y., Hong, B., Their Programmers.” Science 131(3410): 1355–1358. Woodard, F. E. 2018. Mixed Method Study of the Im- Zhang, M., and others. 2023. “The Rise and Potential pact of Calculator Usage on 8th and 12th Grade Stu- of Large Language Model Based Agents: A Survey.” Wikforss, Å., Kendeou, P., and Robinson, D. 2019. dents’ Fundamental Mathematical Skills and Teachers’ arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07864. “Critical Thinking in the Post-Truth Era.” Misinformation Perceptions on Using a Calculator in Learning Math- and fake news in education 279. ematics. Delaware State University. Xiao, G., Yang, D., Xu, L., Li, J., and Jiang, Z. 2024. “The Application of Artificial Intelligence Technology in Wiles, E., Krayer, L., Abbadi, M., Awasthi, U., Kenne- Woolley, A. W., and Gupta, P. 2024. “Understanding Shipping: A Bibliometric Review.” Journal of Marine Sci- dy, R., Mishkin, P., Sack, D., and Candelon, F. 2024. Collective Intelligence: Investigating the Role of Col- ence and Engineering 12(4): 624. “GenAI as an Exoskeleton: Experimental Evidence on lective Memory, Attention, and Reasoning Processes.” Knowledge Workers Using GenAI on New Skills.” Avail- Perspectives on Psychological Science 19(2): 344–354. Xiao, J., Chevallier, F., Gomez, C., Guanter, L., Hicke, able at SSRN 4944588. J. A., Huete, A. R., Ichii, K., and others. 2019. “Remote Woolston, C. 2022. “Is Big Tech Draining AI Talent Sensing of the Terrestrial Carbon Cycle: A Review of Wilhelm, C., Steckelberg, A., and Rebitschek, F. G. from Academia?” Nature Index. Advances over 50 Years.” Remote Sensing of Environ- 2025. “Benefits and Harms Associated with the Use ment 233: 111383. of AI-Related Algorithmic Decision-Making Systems by World Bank. 2017. World Development Report 2017: Healthcare Professionals: A Systematic Review.” The Governance and the Law. Washington, DC: World Xie, G., Deng, Q., Cao, J., and Chang, Q. 2020. “Digi- Lancet Regional Health–Europe 48. Bank. tal Screen Time and Its Effect on Preschoolers’ Behav- ior in China: Results from a Cross-Sectional Study.” Ital- Williams, A. 2024. “Older Adults Express High Con- World Bank. 2024a. “Data Bank: World Development ian Journal of Pediatrics 46(9): 1–7. cern and Limited Knowledge About AI Scams and Indicators.” https://databank.worldbank.org/source Fraud.” AARP Research. https://www.aarp.org/pri/topics /world-development-indicators. Accessed 21 March Xie, T., and Pentina, I. 2022. “Attachment Theory as /work-finances-retirement/fraud-consumer-protection 2025. a Framework to Understand Relationships with So- /ai-fraud-concerns-older-adults/. Accessed 27 Febru- cial Chatbots: A Case Study of Replika.” Proceedings ary 2025. World Bank. 2024b. “Individuals Using the Internet (% of the 55th Hawaii International Conference on Sys- of Population)—Tajikistan.” https://data.worldbank.org tem Sciences. https://scholarspace.manoa.hawaii.edu Wilson, H., Daugherty, P., and Bianzino, N. 2017. “The /indicator/IT.NET.USER.ZS?end=2022&locations=TJ& /server/api/core/bitstreams/69a4e162-d909-4bf4-a833 Jobs That Artificial Intelligence Will Create.” MIT Sloan start=1990&view=chart. Accessed 13 December 2024. -bd5b370dbeca/content. Accessed 23 March 2025. Management Review 58(4): 14–16. World Bank. 2024c. Digital Progress and Trends Re- Xie, Y., Pan, Y., Xu, H., and Mei, Q. 2024. “Bridging Winner, L. 1980. “Do Artifacts Have Politics?” Daedalus port 2023. Washington, DC: World Bank. AI and Science: Implications from a Large-Scale Lit- 109(1): 121–136. erature Analysis of AI4Science.” arXiv preprint arXiv: World Bank. 2024d. World Development Indicators 2412.09628. WIPO (World Intellectual Property Organization). database. Washington, DC. http://data.worldbank.org. 2021. “WIPO Technology Trends 2021: Assistive Tech- Accessed 2 January 2025. Xie, Y., Wu, J., Tu, H., Yang, S., Zhao, B., Zong, Y., Jin, nology.” https://www.wipo.int/publications/en/details Q., Xie, C., and Zhou, Y. 2024. “A Preliminary Study of .jsp?id=4541. Accessed 28 April 2025. World Bank. 2025. “World Development Indicators o1 in Medicine: Are We Closer to an AI Doctor?” arXiv (Employment in Services (% of Total Employment) preprint arXiv:2409.15277. Wizeline. 2023. “Tec De Monterrey and Wizeline Pres- (Modeled ILO Estimate)).” https://data.worldbank.org ent G.AI.L, the First Generative Artificial Intelligence Lab- /indicator/SL.SRV.EMPL.ZS. Accessed 10 March 2025. Xu, S. 2021. “Microsoft Chatbot Spinoff Xiaoice oratory in Latin America.” https://www.globenewswire Reaches $1 Billion Valuation.” Bloomberg. https://www .com/en/news-release/2023/10/12/2759626/0/en/Tec Wright, J. 2023a. “Inside Japan’s Long Experiment in .bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-07-14/microsoft -de-Monterrey-and-Wizeline-present-G-AI-L-the-first Automating Elder Care.” MIT Technology Review. -chatbot-spinoff-xiaoice-reaches-1-billion-valuation -Generative-Artificial-Intelligence-Laboratory-in-Latin ?embedded-checkout=true. Accessed 23 January -America.html. Accessed 11 March 2025. Wright, J. 2023b. Robots Won’t Save Japan: An Eth- 2025. nography of Eldercare Automation. Cornell University WMO (World Meteorological Organization). 2025. Press. Xu, W., Kotecha, M. C., and McAdams, D. A. 2024. “WMO Confirms 2024 as Warmest Year on Record at “How Good Is ChatGPT? An Exploratory Study on Chat- About 1.55°C above Pre-Industrial Level.” WSJ (Wall Street Journal) Staff. 2021. “Inside Tiktok’s GPT’s Performance in Engineering Design Tasks and Algorithm: A WSJ Video Investigation.” https://www Subjective Decision-Making.” Proceedings of the De- Wolczynski, N., Saar-Tsechansky, M., and Wang, .wsj.com/articles/tiktok-algorithm-video-investigation sign Society 4: 2307–2316. T. 2024. “The Value of AI Advice: Personalized and -11626877477. Accessed 10 November 2024. Value-Maximizing AI Advisors Are Necessary to Reli- Xu, Z. 2022. “Human Judges in the Era of Artificial ably Benefit Experts and Organizations.” arXiv preprint WTO (World Trade Organization). 2025. Trading with Intelligence: Challenges and Opportunities.” Applied arXiv:2412.19530. Intelligence How AI Shapes and Is Shaped by Interna- Artificial Intelligence 36(1): 2013652. tional Trade. Geneva: WTO. Wolf, M. J., Miller, K., and Grodzinsky, F. S. 2017. “Why Xu, Z., Jain, S., and Kankanhalli, M. 2024. “Halluci- We Should Have Seen That Coming: Comments on Wu, C., Qiu, P., Liu, J., Gu, H., Li, N., Zhang, Y., Wang, nation Is Inevitable: An Innate Limitation of Large Lan- Microsoft’s Tay ‘Experiment,’ and Wider Implications.” Y., and Xie, W. 2025. “Towards Evaluating and Building guage Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.11817. ACM SIGCAS Computers and Society 47(3): 54–64. Versatile Large Language Models for Medicine.” NPJ Digital Medicine 8(1): 58. Yan, L., Greiff, S., Teuber, Z., and Gašević, D. 2024. Wolf, M., Krause, J., Carney, P. A., Bogart, A., and “Promises and Challenges of Generative Artificial Intel- Kurvers, R. H. J. M. 2015. “Collective Intelligence Wu, D. 2021. “Cripping the History of Computing.” IEEE ligence for Human Learning.” Nature Human Behaviour Meets Medical Decision-Making: The Collective Annals of the History of Computing 43(3): 68–72. 8(10): 1839–1850. REFERENCES 263 Yang, J., Jin, H., Tang, R., Han, X., Feng, Q., Jiang, H., Yu, Y., and Romero, D. M. 2024. “Does the Use of Un- Zhang, Y., Liu, C., Liu, M., Liu, T., Lin, H., Huang, C.-B., Zhong, S., Yin, B., and Hu, X. 2024. “Harnessing the usual Combinations of Datasets Contribute to Greater and Ning, L. 2024. “Attention Is All You Need: Utilizing Power of LLMs in Practice: A Survey on ChatGPT and Scientific Impact?” Proceedings of the National Acad- Attention in AI-Enabled Drug Discovery.” Briefings in Beyond.” ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery emy of Sciences 121(41): e2402802121. Bioinformatics 25(1). from Data 18(6): Article 160. Yuan, A., Coenen, A., Reif, E., and Ippolito, D. 2022. Zhang, Y., Zhu, J., Xie, H., and He, Y. 2025. “Physics- Yang, L., Song, Y., Ren, X., Lyu, C., Wang, Y., Zhuo, J., “Wordcraft: Story Writing with Large Language Models.” Informed Deep Learning for Stochastic Particle Dynam- Liu, L., and others. 2023a. “Out-of-Distribution Gen- Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on ics Estimation.” Proceedings of the National Academy eralization in Natural Language Processing: Past, Pres- Intelligent User Interfaces, 841–852. of Sciences 122(9): e2418643122. ent, and Future.” Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Yuan, J., Di, Z., Zhao, S., and Naseem, U. 2024. “Cul- Zhang, Z., Lee, S., Wu, J., Zhang, D., Li, S., Cambria, 4533–4559. tural Palette: Pluralising Culture Alignment Via Multi- E., and Zhou, G. 2024. “Cross-Domain NER with Gen- Agent Palette.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.11167. erated Task-Oriented Knowledge: An Empirical Study Yang, Y., Zhang, Y., Wu, M., Zhang, K., Zhang, Y., Yu, from Information Density Perspective.” Proceedings of H., Hu, Y., and Wang, B. 2025. “Twinmarket: A Scal- Yurtsever, E., Lambert, J., Carballo, A., and Takeda, the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu- able Behavioral and Socialsimulation for Financial Mar- K. 2020. “A Survey of Autonomous Driving: Common ral Language Processing, 1595–1609. Association for kets.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01506. Practices and Emerging Technologies.” IEEE Access 8: Computational Linguistics. 58443–58469. Yang, Z., Ding, M., Lv, Q., Jiang, Z., He, Z., Guo, Y., Zhang, Z., Rossi, R. A., Kveton, B., Shao, Y., Yang, Bai, J., and Tang, J. 2023b. “GPT Can Solve Mathe- Yuvaraj, N., Chang, V., Gobinathan, B., Pinagapani, D., Zamani, H., Dernoncourt, F., and others. 2024. matical Problems without a Calculator.” arXiv preprint A., Kannan, S., Dhiman, G., and Rajan, A. R. 2021. “Personalization of Large Language Models: A Survey.” arXiv:2309.03241. “Automatic Detection of Cyberbullying Using Multi-Fea- arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00027. ture Based Artificial Intelligence with Deep Decision Yao, B., Cai, Z., Chuang, Y.-S., Yang, S., Jiang, M., Tree Classification.” Computers & Electrical Engineer- Zhang, Z., Zeng, W., Tang, J., Huang, H., and Zhao, Yang, D., and Hu, J. 2024. “No Preference Left Be- ing 92: 107186. X. 2025. “Active in-Context Learning for Cross-Domain hind: Group Distributional Preference Optimization.” Entity Resolution.” Information Fusion 117: 102816. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.20299. ZainEldin, H., Gamel, S. A., Talaat, F. M., Aljohani, M., Baghdadi, N. A., Malki, A., Badawy, M., and Elhos- Zhao, W. X., Zhou, K., Li, J., Tang, T., Wang, X., Hou, Yaqoob, T. 2024. “AI-Based Credit Scoring: Benefits seini, M. A. 2024. “Silent No More: A Comprehensive Y., Min, Y., and others. 2023. “A Survey of Large Lan- and Risks.” Cointelegraph. https://cointelegraph.com Review of Artificial Intelligence, Deep Learning, and guage Models.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.18223 1(2). /learn/articles/ai-based-credit-scoring. Accessed 20 Machine Learning in Facilitating Deaf and Mute Com- December 2024. munication.” Artificial Intelligence Review 57(7): 188. Zhao, Y., Wang, B., and Wang, Y. 2025. “Explicit Vs. Implicit: Investigating Social Bias in Large Language Yenduri, G., Ramalingam, M., Selvi, G. C., Supriya, Zanatto, D., Chattington, M., and Noyes, J. Sense Models through Self-Reflection.” arXiv preprint arXiv: Y., Srivastava, G., Maddikunta, P. K. R., Raj, G. D., of Agency in Human-Machine Interaction. Advances 2501.02295. and others. 2024. “GPT (Generative Pre-Trained in Neuroergonomics and Cognitive Engineering: Pro- Transformer)—A Comprehensive Review on Enabling ceedings of the AHFE 2021 Virtual Conferences on Zhao, Z., Fan, W., Li, J., Liu, Y., Mei, X., Wang, Y., Wen, Technologies, Potential Applications, Emerging Chal- Neuroergonomics and Cognitive Engineering, Industri- Z., and others. 2024. “Recommender Systems in the lenges, and Future Directions.” IEEE Access 12: al Cognitive Ergonomics and Engineering Psychology, Era of Large Language Models (LLMs).” IEEE Trans- 54608–54649. and Cognitive Computing and Internet of Things, July actions on Knowledge and Data Engineering 36(11): 25–29, 2021, USA, 2021. Springer, 353–360. 6889–6907. Yew, G. C. K. 2021. “Trust in and Ethical Design of Carebots: The Case for Ethics of Care.” International Zarifhonarvar, A. 2024. “Economics of ChatGPT: A Zheng, J., and Meister, M. 2025. “The Unbearable Journal of Social Robotics 13(4): 629–645. Labor Market View on the Occupational Impact of Ar- Slowness of Being: Why Do We Live at 10 Bits/S?” tificial Intelligence.” Journal of Electronic Business & Neuron. Yin, C., and Imms, P., and Chowdhury, N. F., and Digital Economics 3(2): 100–116. Chaudhari, N. N., and Ping, H., and Wang, H., and Zhi-Xuan, T., Carroll, M., Franklin, M., and Ashton, Bogdan, P., and others. 2025. “Deep Learning to Zeni, C., Pinsler, R., Zügner, D., Fowler, A., Horton, H. 2024. “Beyond Preferences in AI Alignment.” Philo- Quantify the Pace of Brain Aging in Relation to Neuro- M., Fu, X., Wang, Z., and others. 2025. “A Generative sophical Studies. cognitive Changes.” Proceedings of the National Acad- Model for Inorganic Materials Design.” Nature. emy of Sciences 122(10): e2413442122. Zhong, T., Yang, Z., Liu, Z., Zhang, R., Liu, Y., Sun, H., Zewail, A., Figueroa, A., Graham, J., and Atari, M. Pan, Y., and others. 2024. “Opportunities and Chal- Yin, C., Xiong, Z., Chen, H., Wang, J., Cooper, D., and 2024. “Moral Stereotyping in Large Language Models.” lenges of Large Language Models for Low-Resource David, B. 2015. “A Literature Survey on Smart Cities.” PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/t9x8r. Languages in Humanities Research.” arXiv preprint Science China. Information Sciences 58(10): 1–18. arXiv:2412.04497. Zhai, S., and Liu, Z. 2023. “Artificial Intelligence Tech- Yin, Y., Gao, J., Jones, B. F., and Wang, D. 2021. “Co- nology Innovation and Firm Productivity: Evidence from Zhou, L., Gao, J., Li, D., and Shum, H.-Y. 2020. “The evolution of Policy and Science During the Pandemic.” China.” Finance Research Letters 58: 104437. Design and Implementation of Xiaoice, an Empathetic Science 371(6525): 128–130. Social Chatbot.” Computational Linguistics 46(1): 53–93. Zhang, C., Yang, Z., He, X., and Deng, L. 2020. Yin, Y., Jia, N., and Wakslak, C. J. 2024. “AI Can Help “Multimodal Intelligence: Representation Learning, Zhou, L., Schellaert, W., Martínez-Plumed, F., Moros- People Feel Heard, but an AI Label Diminishes This Information Fusion, and Applications.” IEEE Journal of Daval, Y., Ferri, C., and Hernández-Orallo, J. 2024. Impact.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci- Selected Topics in Signal Processing 14(3): 478-493. “Larger and More Instructable Language Models Be- ences 121(14): e2319112121. come Less Reliable.” Nature 634(8032): 61–68. Zhang, K., Zhou, R., Adhikarla, E., Yan, Z., Liu, Y., Yu, Young, E., Wajcman, J., and Sprejer, L. 2023. “Mind J., Liu, Z., and others. 2024. “A Generalist Vision– Zhou, T., and Zhang, C. 2024. “Examining Generative the Gender Gap: Inequalities in the Emergent Profes- Language Foundation Model for Diverse Biomedical AI User Addiction from a CAC Perspective.” Technology sions of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Data Science.” Tasks.” Nature Medicine 30(11): 3129–3141. in Society 78: 102653. New Technology, Work and Employment 38(3): 391–414. Zhang, M., Rahman, S., Mhasawade, V., and Chu- Zhou, Y., Zheng, S., and Hensen, J. L. M. 2024. “Ma- Yu, F., Moehring, A., Banerjee, O., Salz, T., Agarwal, nara, R. 2024. “Utilizing Big Data without Domain chine Learning-Based Digital District Heating/Cooling N., and Rajpurkar, P. 2024. “Heterogeneity and Pre- Knowledge Impacts Public Health Decision-Making.” with Renewable Integrations and Advanced Low-Car- dictors of the Effects of AI Assistance on Radiologists.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences bon Transition.” Renewable and Sustainable Energy Nature Medicine 30(3): 837–849. 121(39): e2402387121. Reviews 199: 114466. 264 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Zhu, C., Huang, S., Evans, R., and Zhang, W. 2021. of AI and ADMs across Work.” Telematics and Informat- Zuhair, V., Babar, A., Ali, R., Oduoye, M. O., Noor, Z., “Cyberbullying among Adolescents and Children: A ics: 92: 102156. Chris, K., Okon, I. I., and Rehman, L. U. 2024. “Ex- Comprehensive Review of the Global Situation, Risk ploring the Impact of Artificial Intelligence on Global Factors, and Preventive Measures.” Frontiers in Public Zhuravskaya, E., Petrova, M., and Enikolopov, R. Health and Enhancing Healthcare in Developing Na- Health 9: 634909. 2020. “Political Effects of the Internet and Social Me- tions.” Journal of Primary Care & Community Health 15: dia.” Annual Review of Economics 12(1): 415–438. 21501319241245847. Zhu, J., Liapis, A., Risi, S., Bidarra, R., and Young- blood, G. M. 2018. “Explainable AI for Designers: A Zimmerman, A., Janhonen, J., and Beer, E. 2023. Zundl, E., and Rodgers, Y. v. d. M. 2021. “The Future Human-Centered Perspective on Mixed-Initiative Co- “Human/AI Relationships: Challenges, Downsides, and of Work for Domestic Workers in the United States: In- Creation.” 2018 IEEE Conference on Computational Impacts on Human/Human Relationships.” AI and Eth- novations in Technology, Organizing, and Laws.” Work- Intelligence and Games (CIG), 14–17 August. ics 4: 1555–1567. ing Paper 2021-3, Rutgers School of Management and Labor Relations, Piscataway, NJ. Zhu, Z., Zheng, W., Tang, N., and Zhong, W. 2024. Zuboff, S. 2019. The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: “Review of Manpower Management in Healthcare Sys- The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Zysman, J., and Nitzberg, M. 2024. “Generative AI tem: Strategies, Challenges, and Innovations.” Journal Power. PublicAffairs. and the Future of Work: Augmentation or Automation?” of Multidisciplinary Healthcare: 5341–5351. Available at SSRN 4811728. Zuboff, S. 2023. “The Age of Surveillance Capitalism.” Zhuang, K. V., and Goggin, G. 2024. “New Possibili- Social Theory Re-Wired. Routledge. ties or Problems for Disability and Inclusion? The Case REFERENCES 265 Statistical annex Statistical annex READERS GUIDE 269 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT COMPOSITE INDICES 1 Human Development Index and its components 274 2 Human Development Index trends, 1990–2023 279 3 Inequality-adjusted Human Development Index 283 4 Gender Development Index 288 5 Gender Inequality Index 293 6 Multidimensional Poverty Index: developing countries 298 7 Planetary pressures-adjusted Human Development Index 301 DEVELOPING REGIONS 306 STATISTICAL REFERENCES 307 268 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Readers guide The tables provide an overview of key aspects of human income (GNI) per capita converted into purchasing development. The seven tables contain the family of power parity (PPP) terms to eliminate differences in composite human development indices and their com- national price levels. ponents estimated by the Human Development Report The 2021 cycle of the International Comparison Office (HDRO). The sixth table, on multidimensional Programme survey, which is the world’s largest sta- poverty, is produced in partnership with the Oxford tistical initiative and coordinated by the World Bank, Poverty and Human Development Initiative. produced internationally comparable price level in- Tables 1–7 are part of the 2025 Human Development dices and estimates of PPP-based gross domestic Report. The full set of seven statistical tables is product and its major expenditure components in available for download at https://hdr.undp.org/en/ aggregate and per capita terms for 176 participating human-development-report-2025. Unless otherwise economies. The 2025 Human Development Report noted, tables use data available to the HDRO as of uses GNI per capita in constant 2021 PPP terms. 1 November 2024. All indices and indicators, along with technical notes on the calculation of composite Methodology updates indices and additional source information, are availa- ble at https://hdr.undp.org/data-center. The 2025 Report retains all the composite indices Countries and territories are ranked by 2023 from the family of human development indices — Human Development Index (HDI) value. Robustness the HDI, the Inequality- adjusted Human Develop- and reliability analysis has shown that for most coun- ment Index (IHDI), the Gender Development Index tries differences in HDI are not statistically significant (GDI), the Gender Inequality Index (GII), the Multi- at the fourth decimal place. For this reason countries dimensional Poverty Index (MPI) and the Planetary with the same HDI value at three decimal places are pressures- adjusted Human Development Index (PH- listed with tied ranks. DI). The methodology used to compute the indices is the same as the one used in the 2023/2024 Human Sources and definitions Development Report. For details, see Technical notes 1–6 at https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2025_ Unless otherwise noted, the HDRO uses data from in- HDR/hdr2025_technical_notes.pdf. ternational data agencies with the mandate, resourc- es and expertise to collect national data on specific Comparisons over time indicators. and across editions Definitions of indicators and sources for original data components are given at the end of each table, Because national and international agencies continu- with full source details in Statistical references. ally improve their data series, the data— including the HDI values and ranks — presented in this report are Gross national income per capita not comparable to those published in earlier editions. in purchasing power parity terms For HDI comparability across years and countries, see table 2, which presents trends using consistent da- In comparing standard of living across countries, the ta, or https://hdr.undp.org/data-center, which pres- income component of the HDI uses gross national ents interpolated consistent data. READERS GUIDE 269 Discrepancies between national Developed Countries and Small Island Developing and international estimates States are defined according to UN classifications (see https://www.un.org/ohrlls/). National and international data can differ because international agencies harmonize national data us- ing a consistent methodology and occasionally pro- Developing countries duce estimates of missing data to allow comparability across countries. In other cases international agen- The aggregates for developing countries are based on cies might not have access to the most recent national information from all developing countries that are in- data. When HDRO becomes aware of discrepancies, cluded in a regional grouping. it brings them to the attention of national and inter- national data authorities. Organisation for Economic Country groupings and aggregates Co‑operation and Development The tables present weighted aggregates for several Of the 38 Organisation for Economic Co- operation country groupings. In general, an aggregate is shown and Development members, 33 are considered de- only when data are available for at least half the coun- veloped countries and 5 (Costa Rica, Chile, Colom- tries and represent at least two- thirds of the popula- bia, Mexico and Türkiye) are considered developing tion in that grouping. Aggregates for each grouping countries. Aggregates refer to all countries from the cover only the countries for which data are available. group for which data are available. Country notes Human development classification Data for China do not include Hong Kong Special HDI classifications are based on HDI fixed cutoff Administrative Region of China, Macao Special Ad- points, which are derived from the quartiles of dis- ministrative Region of China or Taiwan Province of tributions of the component indicators. The cutoff China. points are HDI of less than 0.550 for low human de- As of 2 May 2016, Czechia is the short name to be velopment, 0.550–0.699 for medium human develop- used for the Czech Republic. ment, 0.700–0.799 for high human development and As of 1 June 2018, the Kingdom of Eswatini is the 0.800 or greater for very high human development. name of the country formerly known as Swaziland. As of 14 February 2019, the Republic of North Macedonia (short form: North Macedonia) is the Regional groupings name of the country formerly known as the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. Regional groupings are based on United Nations De- As of 1 June 2022, Türkiye is the name of the coun- velopment Programme regional classifications. Least try formerly known as Turkey. 270 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Symbols Statistical tables A dash between two years, as in 2010–2023, indicates The seven tables relate to the six composite human that the data are from the most recent year available development indices and their components. Since during the period specified. Growth rates are usually the 2010 Human Development Report, four compos- average annual rates of growth between the first and ite human development indices — the HDI, the IHDI, last years of the period shown. the GII and the MPI for developing countries — have The following symbols are used in the tables: been calculated. The 2014 Report introduced the .. Not available GDI, which compares the HDI calculated separately 0 or 0.0 Nil or negligible for women and men. The 2020 Report introduced the — Not applicable PHDI, which adjusts the HDI for the excessive hu- man pressure on the planet. Statistical acknowledgements For indicators that are global Sustainable Development Goals indicators or can be used in The Report’s composite indices and other statis- monitoring progress towards specific goals, the table tical resources draw on a wide variety of the most headers include the relevant goals and targets. respected international data providers in their spe- Table 1, Human Development Index and its cialized fields. HDRO is particularly grateful to components, ranks countries by 2023 HDI value and Eurostat; the Global Carbon Project; ICF Macro; the details the values of the three HDI components: lon- International Labour Organization; the Internation- gevity, education (with two indicators) and income al Monetary Fund; the Inter- Parliamentary Union; per capita. The table also presents the difference in the Luxembourg Income Study; the Organisation rankings by HDI value and gross national income per for Economic Co- operation and Development; the capita, as well as the rank on the 2022 HDI, calculated Socio- Economic Database for Latin America and using the most recently revised historical data availa- the Caribbean; the United Nations Children’s Fund; ble in 2024. the United Nations Department of Economic and Table 2, Human Development Index trends, Social Affairs; the United Nations Educational, Sci- 1990–2023, provides a time series of HDI values al- entific and Cultural Organization Institute for Statis- lowing 2023 HDI values to be compared with those tics; the United Nations Environment Programme; for previous years. The table uses the most recent- the United Nations Statistics Division; the United ly revised historical data available in 2024 and the Nations University World Institute for Develop- same methodology applied to compute 2023 HDI val- ment Economics Research; the World Bank; the ues. The table also includes the change in HDI rank World Health Organization; and the World Inequal- over the last eight years and the average annual HDI ity Database. The international education database growth rate across four time intervals: 1990–2000, maintained by Robert Barro (Harvard University) 2000–2010, 2010–2023 and 1990–2023. and Jong- Wha Lee (Korea University) was another Table 3, Inequality- adjusted Human Devel- invaluable source for the calculation of the Report’s opment Index, contains two related measures of indices. inequality — the IHDI and the overall loss in HDI due READERS GUIDE 271 to inequality. The IHDI looks beyond the average education by gender. The labour market indicator is achievements of a country in longevity, education participation in the labour force by gender. A low GII and income to show how these achievements are dis- value indicates low inequality between women and tributed among its residents. The IHDI value can be men, and vice- versa. interpreted as the level of human development when Table 6, Multidimensional Poverty Index, cap- inequality is accounted for. The relative difference be- tures the multiple deprivations that people in devel- tween IHDI and HDI values is the loss due to inequal- oping countries face in their health, education and ity in distribution of the HDI within the country. The standard of living. The MPI shows both the incidence table presents the coefficient of human inequality, of nonincome multidimensional poverty (a headcount which is the unweighted average of inequalities in the of those in multidimensional poverty) and its intensity three dimensions. In addition, the table shows each (the average deprivation score experienced by multi- country’s difference in rank on the HDI and the IHDI. dimensionally poor people). Based on deprivation score A negative value means that taking inequality into ac- thresholds, people are classified as multidimensionally count lowers a country’s rank on the HDI. The table poor, in severe multidimensional poverty or vulnerable also presents the income shares of the poorest 40 per- to multidimensional poverty. The table includes the cent, the richest 10 percent and the richest 1 percent contribution of deprivation in each dimension to over- of the population, as well as the Gini coefficient. all multidimensional poverty. It also presents measures Table 4, Gender Development Index, meas- of income poverty — population living below the nation- ures disparities on the HDI by gender. The table con- al poverty line and population living on less than $2.15 tains HDI values estimated separately for women and in purchasing power parity terms per day. men, the ratio of which is the GDI value. The closer Table 7, Planetary pressures- adjusted Human the ratio is to 1, the smaller the gap between women Development Index, adjusts the HDI for planetary and men. Values for the three HDI components — pressures in the Anthropocene to reflect a concern for longevity, education (with two indicators) and in- intergenerational inequality, similar to the Inequality- come per capita — are also presented by gender. The adjusted HDI adjustment, which is motivated by a table includes five country groupings by absolute de- concern for intragenerational inequality. The PHDI viation from gender parity in HDI values. value can be interpreted as the level of human de- Table 5, Gender Inequality Index, presents a velopment adjusted by carbon dioxide emissions per composite measure of gender inequality using three person (production- based) and material footprint per dimensions: reproductive health, empowerment and capita to account for the excessive human pressure on the labour market. The reproductive health indica- the planet. The table presents the relative difference tors are maternal mortality ratio and adolescent birth between PHDI and HDI values as well as each coun- rate. The empowerment indicators are the percentage try’s difference in rank on the HDI and the PHDI. A of parliamentary seats held by women and the per- negative value means that taking planetary pressures centage of population with at least some secondary into account lowers a country’s rank on the HDI. 272 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Human development composite indices TABLE 1 Human Development Index and its components SDG 3 SDG 4.3 SDG 4.4 SDG 8.5 Human Development Life expectancy Expected years Mean years of Gross national income GNI per capita rank HDI Index (HDI) at birth of schooling schooling (GNI) per capita minus HDI rank rank Value (years) (years) (years) (2021 PPP $) HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023a 2023a 2023 2023b 2022 Very high human development 1 Iceland 0.972 82.7 18.9 c 13.9 d 69,117 12 3 2 Norway 0.970 83.3 18.8 c 13.1 e 112,710 f 0 1 2 Switzerland 0.970 84.0 16.7 13.9 e 81,949 f 5 2 4 Denmark 0.962 81.9 18.7 c 13.0 e 76,008 f 4 4 5 Germany 0.959 81.4 17.3 14.3 e 64,053 13 6 5 Sweden 0.959 83.3 19.0 c 12.7 e 66,102 10 4 7 Australia 0.958 83.9 20.7 c 12.9 58,277 14 8 8 Hong Kong, China (SAR) 0.955 85.5 g 16.9 12.4 69,436 4 9 8 Netherlands 0.955 82.2 18.6 c 12.7 e 68,344 6 7 10 Belgium 0.951 82.1 19.0 c 12.7 e 63,582 9 13 11 Ireland 0.949 82.4 19.2 c 11.7 e 90,885 f –6 10 12 Finland 0.948 81.9 19.5 c 13.0 e 57,068 10 11 13 Singapore 0.946 83.7 16.7 12.0 111,239 f –10 14 13 United Kingdom 0.946 81.3 17.8 13.5 54,372 13 11 15 United Arab Emirates 0.940 82.9 15.6 13.0 71,142 –4 23 16 Canada 0.939 82.6 15.9 13.9 54,688 9 16 17 Liechtenstein 0.938 83.6 15.4 12.4 h 166,812 f,i –16 15 17 New Zealand 0.938 82.1 19.3 c 12.9 e 47,260 17 17 17 United States 0.938 79.3 15.9 13.9 73,650 –7 18 20 Korea (Republic of) 0.937 84.3 16.6 12.7 e 49,726 11 19 21 Slovenia 0.931 81.6 17.5 13.0 e 46,361 15 21 22 Austria 0.930 82.0 16.3 12.4 e 63,479 –2 20 23 Japan 0.925 84.7 15.5 12.7 e 47,775 10 23 24 Malta 0.924 83.3 15.9 12.4 e 52,155 5 26 25 Luxembourg 0.922 82.2 14.4 12.6 d 85,461 f –19 22 26 France 0.920 83.3 16.1 11.8 e 55,060 –2 27 27 Israel 0.919 82.4 14.9 13.5 e 48,050 5 23 28 Spain 0.918 83.7 17.8 10.8 e 46,008 9 28 29 Czechia 0.915 79.8 16.8 13.0 e 45,889 9 28 29 Italy 0.915 83.7 16.7 10.8 e 52,389 –1 32 29 San Marino 0.915 85.7 g 14.6 e 11.4 64,706 –13 30 32 Andorra 0.913 84.0 14.5 11.6 64,631 –15 37 32 Cyprus 0.913 81.6 16.2 12.6 e 45,394 7 31 34 Greece 0.908 81.9 20.8 c 11.6 e 35,761 17 36 35 Poland 0.906 78.6 16.7 13.2 e 42,218 5 33 36 Estonia 0.905 79.2 16.0 13.6 e 40,881 8 33 37 Saudi Arabia 0.900 78.7 16.9 11.6 e 50,299 –7 37 38 Bahrain 0.899 81.3 15.9 11.1 52,819 –11 33 39 Lithuania 0.895 76.0 16.5 13.6 e 41,916 2 39 40 Portugal 0.890 82.4 17.5 9.7 e 41,064 3 41 41 Croatia 0.889 78.6 16.3 12.1 j 41,380 1 40 41 Latvia 0.889 76.2 16.5 13.4 e 37,998 6 43 43 Qatar 0.886 82.4 13.1 10.8 105,353 f –39 41 44 Slovakia 0.880 78.3 14.9 13.1 e 36,793 5 44 45 Chile 0.878 81.2 16.9 11.3 e 28,047 16 45 46 Hungary 0.870 77.0 15.5 12.3 e 37,236 2 46 47 Argentina 0.865 77.4 18.8 c 11.2 e 25,876 20 47 48 Montenegro 0.862 77.1 15.5 12.8 e 28,026 14 48 48 Uruguay 0.862 78.1 17.5 10.5 28,650 12 50 50 Oman 0.858 80.0 13.4 11.9 36,096 0 52 51 Türkiye 0.853 77.2 19.8 c 9.0 e 34,507 1 48 52 Kuwait 0.852 80.4 15.9 e 7.6 e 56,612 –29 53 53 Antigua and Barbuda 0.851 77.6 15.5 e 11.6 27,387 10 51 54 Seychelles 0.848 72.9 18.2 c 11.2 29,195 4 56 55 Bulgaria 0.845 75.6 15.3 11.5 e 32,175 0 57 55 Romania 0.845 75.9 14.1 11.6 39,374 –10 54 57 Georgia 0.844 74.5 16.8 12.7 20,753 18 55 58 Saint Kitts and Nevis 0.840 72.1 18.4 c,k 10.8 l 29,105 1 60 59 Panama 0.839 79.6 13.3 e 10.8 e 34,385 –6 57 60 Brunei Darussalam 0.837 75.3 13.7 m 9.3 75,827 f –51 63 60 Kazakhstan 0.837 74.4 14.0 12.5 e 30,989 –4 59 62 Costa Rica 0.833 80.8 16.3 e 8.8 e 23,417 6 65 Continued → 274 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 1 SDG 3 SDG 4.3 SDG 4.4 SDG 8.5 Human Development Life expectancy Expected years Mean years of Gross national income GNI per capita rank HDI Index (HDI) at birth of schooling schooling (GNI) per capita minus HDI rank rank Value (years) (years) (years) (2021 PPP $) HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023a 2023a 2023 2023b 2022 62 Serbia 0.833 76.8 15.0 11.6 e 23,115 7 61 64 Russian Federation 0.832 73.2 13.2 12.4 39,222 –18 61 65 Belarus 0.824 74.4 13.7 12.3 e 26,725 1 64 66 Bahamas 0.820 74.6 11.9 n 12.8 e 30,975 –9 66 67 Malaysia 0.819 76.7 12.7 11.1 32,553 –13 68 68 North Macedonia 0.815 77.4 14.8 10.2 m 22,128 2 67 69 Armenia 0.811 75.7 14.4 11.3 d 20,221 9 72 69 Barbados 0.811 76.2 16.6 e 9.9 d 17,328 20 69 71 Albania 0.810 79.6 14.5 10.2 d 17,627 16 70 72 Trinidad and Tobago 0.807 73.5 14.2 o 10.8 27,000 –7 71 73 Mauritius 0.806 74.9 14.2 e 10.1 d 27,280 –9 75 74 Bosnia and Herzegovina 0.804 77.9 13.2 11.0 19,827 6 73 High human development 75 Iran (Islamic Republic of) 0.799 77.7 14.0 e 10.8 e 16,096 19 77 76 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 0.798 71.2 16.3 n 11.3 p 17,247 14 75 76 Thailand 0.798 76.4 15.4 e 9.0 20,570 1 78 78 China 0.797 78.0 15.5 e 8.0 e 22,029 –7 74 79 Peru 0.794 77.7 14.9 e 10.2 e 14,339 23 79 80 Grenada 0.791 75.2 16.6 e 9.4 q 14,349 21 80 81 Azerbaijan 0.789 74.4 12.9 11.1 20,668 –5 82 81 Mexico 0.789 75.1 14.5 9.3 e 21,813 –8 84 83 Colombia 0.788 77.7 14.3 9.0 e 18,666 1 85 84 Brazil 0.786 75.8 15.8 8.4 e 18,011 1 86 84 Palau 0.786 69.3 14.1 13.3 p 16,035 11 81 86 Moldova (Republic of) 0.785 71.2 14.6 e 11.8 15,867 11 82 87 Ukraine 0.779 73.4 13.3 11.1 d 16,933 5 90 88 Ecuador 0.777 77.4 14.9 9.0 13,986 15 89 89 Dominican Republic 0.776 73.7 13.6 9.4 e 22,024 –17 87 89 Guyana 0.776 70.2 13.0 o 8.7 d 46,959 –54 95 89 Sri Lanka 0.776 77.5 13.1 10.8 12,616 22 88 92 Tonga 0.769 72.9 17.8 e 10.9 d 7,438 38 91 93 Maldives 0.766 81.0 12.8 7.4 d 19,317 –11 91 93 Viet Nam 0.766 74.6 15.5 9.0 13,033 14 91 95 Turkmenistan 0.764 70.1 13.2 11.2 e 17,716 –9 96 96 Algeria 0.763 76.3 15.5 7.4 e 15,114 3 96 97 Cuba 0.762 78.1 13.9 10.6 d 8,415 r 30 91 98 Dominica 0.761 71.1 14.2 e 10.1 16,001 –2 98 99 Paraguay 0.756 73.8 14.0 e 8.9 e 15,252 –1 102 100 Egypt 0.754 71.6 13.1 e 10.1 e 16,218 –7 100 100 Jordan 0.754 77.8 13.1 10.2 9,222 22 100 102 Lebanon 0.752 77.8 11.7 10.4 s 11,299 13 99 103 Saint Lucia 0.748 72.7 12.7 8.6 e 20,900 –29 102 104 Mongolia 0.747 71.7 13.6 9.4 m 14,787 –4 105 105 Tunisia 0.746 76.5 14.7 e 7.6 12,011 9 104 106 South Africa 0.741 66.1 13.8 11.6 13,694 0 107 107 Uzbekistan 0.740 72.4 12.5 11.9 8,826 17 107 108 Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 0.733 68.6 15.6 e 10.0 e 9,445 13 113 108 Gabon 0.733 68.3 12.5 e 9.7 18,854 –25 111 108 Marshall Islands 0.733 66.9 16.4 11.6 p 7,224 23 110 111 Botswana 0.731 69.2 11.4 10.5 16,984 –20 112 111 Fiji 0.731 67.3 13.8 10.4 12,843 –3 114 113 Indonesia 0.728 71.1 13.3 8.7 e 13,700 –8 114 114 Suriname 0.722 73.6 11.0 8.4 e 17,344 –26 116 115 Belize 0.721 73.6 12.0 8.8 12,343 –2 118 115 Libya 0.721 69.3 12.9 q 7.8 l 19,831 –36 106 117 Jamaica 0.720 71.5 12.4 e 10.0 10,057 t 2 117 117 Kyrgyzstan 0.720 71.7 12.7 12.1 e 6,078 24 118 117 Philippines 0.720 69.8 12.8 e 10.0 10,731 0 120 120 Morocco 0.710 75.3 15.1 6.2 8,653 5 122 121 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 0.709 72.5 13.0 p 9.7 p 7,157 u 11 121 122 Samoa 0.708 71.7 12.4 11.3 e 5,952 21 123 123 Nicaragua 0.706 74.9 11.5 9.9 6,881 11 124 124 Nauru 0.703 62.1 12.8 q 9.4 q 19,642 –43 125 Continued → TABLE 1 / HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX AND ITS COMPONENTS 275 TABLE 1 SDG 3 SDG 4.3 SDG 4.4 SDG 8.5 Human Development Life expectancy Expected years Mean years of Gross national income GNI per capita rank HDI Index (HDI) at birth of schooling schooling (GNI) per capita minus HDI rank rank Value (years) (years) (years) (2021 PPP $) HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023a 2023a 2023 2023b 2022 Medium human development 125 Bhutan 0.698 73.0 13.2 e 5.8 l 13,843 –21 126 126 Eswatini (Kingdom of) 0.695 64.1 15.2 e 8.7 9,919 –6 126 126 Iraq 0.695 72.3 12.4 v 6.8 o 12,654 –16 126 128 Tajikistan 0.691 71.8 10.8 e 11.3 d 5,747 17 129 129 Tuvalu 0.689 67.1 12.4 w 10.8 e 7,006 4 130 130 Bangladesh 0.685 74.7 12.3 6.8 8,498 –4 131 130 India 0.685 72.0 13.0 6.9 9,047 –7 133 132 El Salvador 0.678 72.1 11.1 7.3 10,595 –14 134 133 Equatorial Guinea 0.674 63.7 12.5 q 8.3 l 12,762 –24 132 133 Palestine, State of 0.674 65.2 13.0 10.1 6,547 5 109 135 Cabo Verde 0.668 76.1 11.4 e 6.1 l 8,165 –7 135 136 Namibia 0.665 67.4 11.8 x 7.3 d 10,917 –20 137 137 Guatemala 0.662 72.6 10.7 5.8 12,459 –25 136 138 Congo 0.649 65.8 12.7 e 8.3 d 5,903 6 138 139 Honduras 0.645 72.9 10.2 e 7.5 e 6,065 3 139 140 Kiribati 0.644 66.5 11.9 y 9.1 l 4,947 11 140 141 Sao Tome and Principe 0.637 69.7 12.9 o 6.0 e 5,583 6 141 142 Timor-Leste 0.634 67.7 13.3 x 6.2 x 5,435 8 142 143 Ghana 0.628 65.5 11.4 7.1 6,846 –8 144 143 Kenya 0.628 63.6 11.5 x 8.6 5,608 3 143 145 Nepal 0.622 70.4 13.8 4.5 4,726 10 150 146 Vanuatu 0.621 71.5 11.8 e 7.2 l 3,404 20 145 147 Lao People's Democratic Republic 0.617 69.0 9.6 6.1 d 8,106 –18 147 148 Angola 0.616 64.6 12.2 6.0 x 6,631 –11 146 149 Micronesia (Federated States of) 0.615 67.2 11.5 q 7.3 l 4,246 7 147 150 Myanmar 0.609 66.9 11.5 s 6.4 z 4,919 aa 3 149 151 Cambodia 0.606 70.7 11.2 5.2 4,931 1 151 152 Comoros 0.603 66.8 13.3 e 6.0 3,481 12 151 153 Zimbabwe 0.598 62.8 11.1 e 8.9 e 3,511 9 153 154 Zambia 0.595 66.3 11.0 ab 7.4 d 3,447 11 154 155 Cameroon 0.588 63.7 10.8 6.6 d 4,746 –1 156 156 Solomon Islands 0.584 70.5 11.3 q 5.9 l 2,777 18 155 157 Côte d'Ivoire 0.582 61.9 11.4 4.9 6,735 –21 162 157 Uganda 0.582 68.3 11.6 x 6.3 e 2,736 18 157 159 Rwanda 0.578 67.8 12.6 4.9 2,971 9 160 160 Papua New Guinea 0.576 66.1 11.5 x 5.0 d 3,971 –2 158 161 Togo 0.571 62.7 13.1 e 5.9 e 2,856 9 161 162 Syrian Arab Republic 0.564 72.1 7.4 n 5.9 p 3,918 –3 159 163 Mauritania 0.563 68.5 7.9 e 4.9 d 6,267 –23 163 164 Nigeria 0.560 54.5 10.5 7.6 5,569 –16 164 165 Tanzania (United Republic of) 0.555 67.0 8.6 6.1 3,515 –4 165 166 Haiti 0.554 64.9 10.9 q 5.4 ac 2,935 3 166 167 Lesotho 0.550 57.4 11.0 e 7.7 e 3,029 0 167 Low human development 168 Pakistan 0.544 67.6 7.9 e 4.3 e 5,501 –19 168 169 Senegal 0.530 68.7 9.1 2.9 e 4,202 –12 169 170 Gambia 0.524 65.9 9.0 x 4.7 x 2,812 1 170 171 Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 0.522 61.9 10.9 e 7.4 d 1,431 17 172 172 Malawi 0.517 67.4 9.9 5.2 m 1,634 12 173 173 Benin 0.515 60.8 10.4 3.2 3,806 –13 174 174 Guinea-Bissau 0.514 64.1 10.6 o 3.7 2,403 2 175 175 Djibouti 0.513 66.0 6.2 e 4.0 p 6,368 –36 176 176 Sudan 0.511 66.3 8.6 e 4.0 2,810 –4 171 177 Liberia 0.510 62.2 10.5 6.2 e 1,538 9 177 178 Eritrea 0.503 68.6 7.3 e 5.1 l 2,029 1 178 179 Guinea 0.500 60.7 10.4 e 2.5 e 3,494 –16 179 180 Ethiopia 0.497 67.3 9.2 x 2.4 e 2,796 –7 181 181 Afghanistan 0.496 66.0 10.8 e 2.5 1,972 –1 180 182 Mozambique 0.493 63.6 10.8 e 4.6 1,356 7 182 183 Madagascar 0.487 63.6 9.1 e 4.6 1,656 0 183 184 Yemen 0.470 69.3 7.5 p 5.5 1,018 7 184 185 Sierra Leone 0.467 61.8 9.1 o 3.5 e 1,714 –3 185 Continued → 276 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 1 SDG 3 SDG 4.3 SDG 4.4 SDG 8.5 Human Development Life expectancy Expected years Mean years of Gross national income GNI per capita rank HDI Index (HDI) at birth of schooling schooling (GNI) per capita minus HDI rank rank Value (years) (years) (years) (2021 PPP $) HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023a 2023a 2023 2023b 2022 186 Burkina Faso 0.459 61.1 8.7 2.3 2,391 –9 186 187 Burundi 0.439 63.7 9.8 e 3.5 e 859 5 187 188 Mali 0.419 60.4 7.0 e 1.6 m 2,342 –10 188 188 Niger 0.419 61.2 8.3 e 1.4 d 1,590 –3 189 190 Chad 0.416 55.1 8.3 e 2.3 e 1,748 –9 189 191 Central African Republic 0.414 57.4 7.4 e 4.0 d 1,100 –1 .. 192 Somalia 0.404 58.8 7.5 q 1.9 1,475 –5 192 193 South Sudan 0.388 57.6 5.6 e 5.7 ad 688 0 191 Other countries or territories Korea (Democratic People's Rep. of) .. 73.6 12.2 e .. .. .. .. Monaco .. 86.4 g 21.7 c .. .. .. .. Human development groups Very high human development 0.914 80.0 16.4 12.5 53,014 — — High human development 0.777 75.7 14.6 8.7 18,405 — — Medium human development 0.656 69.3 12.1 6.8 7,822 — — Low human development 0.515 65.0 8.9 4.0 3,007 — — Developing countries 0.712 72.0 12.7 7.8 13,301 — — Regions Arab States 0.719 72.5 12.0 8.1 15,825 — — East Asia and the Pacific 0.775 75.9 14.6 8.3 19,520 — — Europe and Central Asia 0.818 74.8 15.6 10.7 23,171 — — Latin America and the Caribbean 0.783 75.6 14.8 9.1 18,048 — — South Asia 0.672 71.9 12.1 6.8 8,722 — — Sub-Saharan Africa 0.568 62.5 10.3 6.2 4,352 — — Least developed countries 0.560 66.5 10.2 5.1 3,637 — — Small island developing states 0.739 71.9 12.6 8.6 19,343 — — Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 0.916 80.6 16.5 12.3 52,698 — — World 0.756 73.4 13.0 8.8 20,327 — — TABLE 1 / HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX AND ITS COMPONENTS 277 TABLE 1 x Updated by HDRO based on data from ICF Macro Notes Demographic and Health Surveys for various years and Definitions UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). a Data refer to 2023 or the most recent year available. Human Development Index (HDI): A composite index y Updated by HDRO based on data from UNICEF Multiple measuring average achievement in three basic dimensions of b Based on countries for which a Human Development Indicator Cluster Surveys for various years and estimates human development—a long and healthy life, knowledge and Index (HDI) value is calculated. using cross-country regression. a decent standard of living. See Technical note 1 at https://hdr. c In calculating the HDI value, expected years of schooling undp.org/sites/default/files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_technical_ z Refers to 2019 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics is capped at 18 years. notes.pdf for details on how the HDI is calculated. (2024). d Updated by HDRO based on data from Barro and Lee Life expectancy at birth: Number of years a newborn infant aa HDRO estimate based on data from IMF (2024), United (2018) and UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). could expect to live if prevailing patterns of age-specific Nations Statistics Division (2025) and World Bank (2024a). mortality rates at the time of birth stay the same throughout e Updated by HDRO based on data from UNESCO ab Updated by HDRO based on data from ICF Macro De- the infant’s life. Institute for Statistics (2024). mographic and Health Surveys for various years. Expected years of schooling: Number of years of schooling f In calculating the HDI value, GNI per capita is capped at ac Refers to 2017 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics that a child of school entrance age can expect to receive if $75,000. (2024). prevailing patterns of age-specific enrolment rates persist g In calculating the HDI value, life expectancy is capped at throughout the child’s life. ad Refers to 2008 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics 85 years. (2024). Mean years of schooling: Average number of years of education h Updated by HDRO using the mean years of schooling received by people ages 25 and older, converted from education trend of Austria and data from UNESCO Institute for attainment levels using official durations of each level. Statistics (2024). Gross national income (GNI) per capita: Aggregate income i Estimated using the purchasing power parity (PPP) rate of an economy generated by its production and its ownership and projected growth rate of Switzerland. of factors of production, less the incomes paid for the use of factors of production owned by the rest of the world, converted j Updated by HDRO based on data from Eurostat (2024) to international dollars using PPP rates, divided by midyear and UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). population. k Refers to 2015 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics GNI per capita rank minus HDI rank: Difference in ranking by (2024). GNI per capita and by HDI value. A negative value means that l HDRO estimate based on data from Robert Barro and the country is better ranked by GNI than by HDI value. Jong-Wha Lee, ICF Macro Demographic and Health Sur- HDI rank for 2022: Ranking by HDI value for 2022, calculated veys, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and using the same most recently revised data available that were Development, United Nations Children’s Fund ( UNICEF) used to calculate HDI values for 2023. Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys and the United Na- tions Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Institute for Statistics. m Refers to 2020 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics Main data sources (2024). n HDRO estimate based on data from the Center for Columns 1 and 7: HDRO calculations based on data from Distributive, Labor and Social Studies and the World Barro and Lee (2018), IMF (2024), UNDESA (2024a), UNESCO Bank’s Socio-Economic Database for Latin America and Institute for Statistics (2024), United Nations Statistics Division the Caribbean, ICF Macro Demographic and Health (2025) and World Bank (2024a). Surveys, the UNESCO Institute for Statistics and UNICEF Column 2: UNDESA 2024a. Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. Column 3: ICF Macro Demographic and Health Surveys, o Updated by HDRO based on data from UNICEF Multiple UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2024 and UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys for various years and UNESCO Indicator Cluster Surveys. Institute for Statistics (2024). Column 4: Barro and Lee 2018, Eurostat 2024, ICF Macro De- p Updated by HDRO based on data from UNESCO Institute mographic and Health Surveys, UNESCO Institute for Statistics for Statistics (2024) and estimates using cross-country 2024 and UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. regression. Column 5: IMF 2024, United Nations Statistics Division 2025 q Based on HDRO estimates using cross-country regression. and World Bank 2024a. r HDRO estimate calculated based on United Nations Column 6: Calculated based on data in columns 1 and 5. Statistics Division (2025) and World Bank (2024a). s Refers to 2018 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). t HDRO estimate based on data from IMF (2024) and World Bank (2024a). u IMF 2024. v Updated by HDRO based on data from UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys for various years. w HDRO estimate based on data from ICF Macro Demo- graphic and Health Surveys, the UNESCO Institute for Statistics and UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. 278 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 2 Human Development Index trends, 1990–2023 Change in Human Development Index (HDI) HDI rank Average annual HDI growth Value (%) HDI RANK 1990 2000 2010 2015 2020 2021 2022 2023 2015–2023a 1990–2000 2000–2010 2010–2023 1990–2023 Very high human development 1 Iceland 0.841 0.902 0.935 0.956 0.965 0.967 0.964 0.972 2 0.70 0.36 0.30 0.44 2 Norway 0.856 0.924 0.947 0.959 0.969 0.969 0.967 0.970 –1 0.77 0.25 0.18 0.38 2 Switzerland 0.858 0.892 0.945 0.957 0.963 0.968 0.966 0.970 0 0.39 0.58 0.20 0.37 4 Denmark 0.844 0.896 0.920 0.943 0.954 0.958 0.959 0.962 2 0.60 0.26 0.34 0.40 5 Germany 0.834 0.897 0.936 0.948 0.955 0.958 0.955 0.959 –1 0.73 0.43 0.19 0.42 5 Sweden 0.818 0.912 0.918 0.945 0.951 0.958 0.959 0.959 0 1.09 0.07 0.34 0.48 7 Australia 0.867 0.897 0.929 0.938 0.950 0.954 0.952 0.958 1 0.34 0.35 0.24 0.30 8 Hong Kong, China (SAR) 0.755 0.839 0.912 0.937 0.950 0.961 0.950 0.955 2 1.06 0.84 0.36 0.71 8 Netherlands 0.855 0.900 0.925 0.940 0.945 0.951 0.953 0.955 –1 0.51 0.27 0.25 0.34 10 Belgium 0.824 0.894 0.921 0.933 0.939 0.948 0.945 0.951 3 0.82 0.30 0.25 0.44 11 Ireland 0.776 0.869 0.915 0.931 0.948 0.946 0.947 0.949 4 1.14 0.52 0.28 0.61 12 Finland 0.823 0.898 0.920 0.938 0.947 0.949 0.946 0.948 –4 0.88 0.24 0.23 0.43 13 Singapore 0.819 0.882 0.932 0.935 0.944 0.948 0.942 0.946 –2 0.74 0.55 0.11 0.44 13 United Kingdom 0.812 0.870 0.921 0.931 0.930 0.941 0.946 0.946 2 0.69 0.57 0.21 0.46 15 United Arab Emirates 0.713 0.790 0.835 0.857 0.909 0.903 0.921 0.940 27 1.03 0.56 0.92 0.84 16 Canada 0.865 0.894 0.918 0.932 0.931 0.937 0.935 0.939 –2 0.33 0.27 0.17 0.25 17 Liechtenstein .. 0.882 0.914 0.925 0.929 0.933 0.936 0.938 1 .. 0.36 0.20 .. 17 New Zealand 0.811 0.896 0.926 0.934 0.940 0.939 0.933 0.938 –5 1.00 0.33 0.10 0.44 17 United States 0.878 0.895 0.919 0.928 0.925 0.921 0.930 0.938 0 0.19 0.26 0.16 0.20 20 Korea (Republic of) 0.738 0.830 0.894 0.914 0.928 0.933 0.928 0.937 1 1.18 0.75 0.36 0.73 21 Slovenia 0.734 0.829 0.896 0.909 0.918 0.924 0.926 0.931 2 1.22 0.78 0.30 0.72 22 Austria 0.832 0.879 0.912 0.919 0.925 0.930 0.927 0.930 –3 0.55 0.37 0.15 0.34 23 Japan 0.853 0.889 0.907 0.917 0.922 0.922 0.921 0.925 –3 0.41 0.20 0.15 0.25 24 Malta 0.735 0.790 0.867 0.892 0.903 0.914 0.917 0.924 5 0.72 0.93 0.49 0.70 25 Luxembourg 0.787 0.861 0.909 0.913 0.916 0.918 0.922 0.922 –3 0.90 0.54 0.11 0.48 26 France 0.798 0.852 0.888 0.901 0.909 0.915 0.916 0.920 –1 0.66 0.41 0.27 0.43 27 Israel 0.787 0.839 0.889 0.902 0.912 0.918 0.921 0.919 –3 0.64 0.58 0.26 0.47 28 Spain 0.766 0.833 0.875 0.895 0.901 0.912 0.911 0.918 0 0.84 0.49 0.37 0.55 29 Czechia 0.753 0.817 0.880 0.900 0.898 0.901 0.911 0.915 –3 0.82 0.75 0.30 0.59 29 Italy 0.787 0.849 0.887 0.889 0.899 0.908 0.905 0.915 1 0.76 0.44 0.24 0.46 29 San Marino .. 0.881 0.905 0.896 0.895 0.903 0.910 0.915 –2 .. 0.27 0.08 .. 32 Andorra .. 0.825 0.870 0.869 0.851 0.871 0.893 0.913 3 .. 0.53 0.37 .. 32 Cyprus 0.749 0.808 0.869 0.882 0.905 0.907 0.908 0.913 1 0.76 0.73 0.38 0.60 34 Greece 0.770 0.828 0.876 0.888 0.896 0.897 0.897 0.908 –3 0.73 0.57 0.28 0.50 35 Poland 0.722 0.801 0.852 0.879 0.880 0.884 0.902 0.906 –1 1.04 0.62 0.47 0.69 36 Estonia 0.738 0.793 0.868 0.888 0.901 0.899 0.902 0.905 –5 0.72 0.91 0.32 0.62 37 Saudi Arabia 0.670 0.737 0.801 0.851 0.875 0.878 0.893 0.900 9 0.96 0.84 0.90 0.90 38 Bahrain 0.734 0.775 0.810 0.868 0.885 0.885 0.902 0.899 –1 0.55 0.44 0.81 0.62 39 Lithuania 0.745 0.778 0.854 0.869 0.888 0.887 0.888 0.895 –4 0.43 0.94 0.36 0.56 40 Portugal 0.707 0.797 0.836 0.857 0.870 0.876 0.883 0.890 2 1.21 0.48 0.48 0.70 41 Croatia .. 0.769 0.831 0.852 0.867 0.876 0.886 0.889 4 .. 0.78 0.52 .. 41 Latvia 0.736 0.764 0.833 0.859 0.879 0.871 0.881 0.889 –1 0.37 0.87 0.50 0.57 43 Qatar 0.767 0.795 0.834 0.860 0.872 0.866 0.883 0.886 –4 0.36 0.48 0.47 0.44 44 Slovakia 0.698 0.774 0.851 0.861 0.867 0.859 0.873 0.880 –6 1.04 0.95 0.26 0.70 45 Chile 0.718 0.771 0.823 0.855 0.856 0.865 0.869 0.878 –1 0.71 0.65 0.50 0.61 46 Hungary 0.730 0.781 0.838 0.847 0.857 0.852 0.867 0.870 1 0.68 0.71 0.29 0.53 47 Argentina 0.733 0.789 0.844 0.859 0.851 0.847 0.858 0.865 –7 0.74 0.68 0.19 0.50 48 Montenegro .. .. 0.815 0.839 0.841 0.840 0.853 0.862 0 .. .. 0.43 .. 48 Uruguay 0.713 0.764 0.796 0.818 0.837 0.837 0.852 0.862 13 0.69 0.41 0.61 0.58 50 Oman .. 0.707 0.804 0.838 0.843 0.834 0.846 0.858 1 .. 1.29 0.50 .. 51 Türkiye 0.598 0.669 0.750 0.821 0.838 0.841 0.853 0.853 7 1.13 1.15 0.99 1.08 52 Kuwait 0.698 0.778 0.812 0.832 0.837 0.839 0.845 0.852 1 1.09 0.43 0.37 0.61 53 Antigua and Barbuda .. .. 0.828 0.839 0.840 0.843 0.848 0.851 –5 .. .. 0.21 .. 54 Seychelles .. .. 0.758 0.819 0.853 0.838 0.836 0.848 5 .. .. 0.87 .. 55 Bulgaria 0.706 0.733 0.799 0.824 0.826 0.817 0.835 0.845 1 0.38 0.87 0.43 0.55 55 Romania 0.719 0.730 0.822 0.823 0.832 0.829 0.840 0.845 2 0.15 1.19 0.21 0.49 57 Georgia .. 0.705 0.770 0.807 0.822 0.819 0.838 0.844 6 .. 0.89 0.71 .. 58 Saint Kitts and Nevis .. .. 0.791 0.830 0.828 0.818 0.829 0.840 –4 .. .. 0.46 .. 59 Panama 0.672 0.718 0.775 0.803 0.808 0.819 0.835 0.839 6 0.66 0.77 0.61 0.67 60 Brunei Darussalam 0.781 0.792 0.830 0.839 0.836 0.835 0.825 0.837 –12 0.14 0.47 0.06 0.21 60 Kazakhstan 0.689 0.692 0.781 0.819 0.826 0.816 0.831 0.837 –1 0.04 1.22 0.53 0.59 62 Costa Rica 0.677 0.720 0.776 0.803 0.819 0.817 0.823 0.833 3 0.62 0.75 0.55 0.63 Continued → TABLE 2 / HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX TRENDS, 1990–2023 279 TABLE 2 Change in Human Development Index (HDI) HDI rank Average annual HDI growth Value (%) HDI RANK 1990 2000 2010 2015 2020 2021 2022 2023 2015–2023a 1990–2000 2000–2010 2010–2023 1990–2023 62 Serbia .. 0.701 0.775 0.802 0.809 0.807 0.826 0.833 5 .. 1.01 0.56 .. 64 Russian Federation 0.762 0.750 0.808 0.833 0.818 0.813 0.826 0.832 –12 –0.16 0.75 0.23 0.27 65 Belarus .. 0.724 0.803 0.825 0.815 0.817 0.824 0.824 –10 .. 1.04 0.20 .. 66 Bahamas 0.762 0.787 0.801 0.807 0.797 0.794 0.818 0.820 –3 0.32 0.18 0.18 0.22 67 Malaysia 0.653 0.733 0.779 0.800 0.810 0.802 0.810 0.819 2 1.16 0.61 0.39 0.69 68 North Macedonia 0.644 0.686 0.765 0.795 0.783 0.781 0.811 0.815 4 0.63 1.10 0.49 0.72 69 Armenia 0.663 0.667 0.747 0.777 0.761 0.786 0.801 0.811 9 0.06 1.14 0.63 0.61 69 Barbados 0.730 0.762 0.797 0.800 0.803 0.803 0.807 0.811 0 0.43 0.45 0.13 0.32 71 Albania 0.654 0.682 0.769 0.797 0.794 0.794 0.806 0.810 0 0.42 1.21 0.40 0.65 72 Trinidad and Tobago 0.661 0.714 0.789 0.808 0.800 0.796 0.805 0.807 –10 0.77 1.00 0.17 0.61 73 Mauritius 0.627 0.683 0.755 0.792 0.795 0.789 0.794 0.806 0 0.86 1.01 0.50 0.76 74 Bosnia and Herzegovina .. 0.674 0.725 0.769 0.783 0.783 0.799 0.804 7 .. 0.73 0.80 .. High human development 75 Iran (Islamic Republic of) 0.626 0.710 0.778 0.788 0.775 0.777 0.793 0.799 –1 1.27 0.92 0.21 0.74 76 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines .. 0.700 0.746 0.765 0.781 0.781 0.794 0.798 11 .. 0.64 0.52 .. 76 Thailand 0.584 0.657 0.742 0.788 0.798 0.800 0.792 0.798 –2 1.18 1.22 0.56 0.95 78 China 0.491 0.598 0.710 0.750 0.786 0.794 0.796 0.797 16 1.99 1.73 0.89 1.48 79 Peru 0.625 0.682 0.731 0.768 0.769 0.764 0.790 0.794 5 0.88 0.70 0.64 0.73 80 Grenada .. .. 0.771 0.782 0.782 0.782 0.789 0.791 –4 .. .. 0.20 .. 81 Azerbaijan .. 0.652 0.744 0.771 0.757 0.765 0.784 0.789 –1 .. 1.33 0.45 .. 81 Mexico 0.668 0.712 0.751 0.773 0.763 0.761 0.783 0.789 –2 0.64 0.53 0.38 0.51 83 Colombia 0.623 0.679 0.741 0.767 0.764 0.762 0.782 0.788 3 0.86 0.88 0.47 0.71 84 Brazil 0.641 0.690 0.748 0.764 0.770 0.768 0.780 0.786 4 0.74 0.81 0.38 0.62 84 Palau .. 0.736 0.779 0.802 0.799 0.789 0.786 0.786 –17 .. 0.57 0.07 .. 86 Moldova (Republic of) .. .. 0.739 0.759 0.770 0.773 0.784 0.785 5 .. .. 0.47 .. 87 Ukraine 0.750 0.716 0.782 0.778 0.783 0.772 0.772 0.779 –10 –0.46 0.89 –0.03 0.12 88 Ecuador 0.646 0.683 0.737 0.764 0.740 0.753 0.773 0.777 0 0.56 0.76 0.41 0.56 89 Dominican Republic 0.589 0.658 0.715 0.747 0.767 0.762 0.778 0.776 6 1.11 0.83 0.63 0.84 89 Guyana 0.494 0.567 0.647 0.683 0.722 0.713 0.763 0.776 33 1.39 1.33 1.41 1.38 89 Sri Lanka 0.638 0.702 0.748 0.769 0.780 0.777 0.777 0.776 –8 0.96 0.64 0.28 0.60 92 Tonga 0.641 0.688 0.724 0.743 0.765 0.763 0.764 0.769 4 0.71 0.51 0.46 0.55 93 Maldives .. 0.639 0.689 0.725 0.730 0.745 0.764 0.766 10 .. 0.76 0.82 .. 93 Viet Nam 0.499 0.604 0.686 0.717 0.755 0.754 0.764 0.766 16 1.93 1.28 0.85 1.31 95 Turkmenistan .. .. 0.700 0.725 0.744 0.754 0.761 0.764 8 .. .. 0.68 .. 96 Algeria 0.595 0.651 0.718 0.737 0.742 0.755 0.761 0.763 3 0.90 0.98 0.47 0.76 97 Cuba 0.687 0.697 0.783 0.769 0.762 0.745 0.764 0.762 –16 0.14 1.17 –0.21 0.31 98 Dominica .. 0.721 0.747 0.741 0.753 0.749 0.759 0.761 0 .. 0.35 0.14 .. 99 Paraguay 0.607 0.664 0.709 0.737 0.742 0.723 0.747 0.756 0 0.90 0.66 0.49 0.67 100 Egypt 0.572 0.639 0.677 0.706 0.736 0.738 0.751 0.754 15 1.11 0.58 0.83 0.84 100 Jordan 0.619 0.672 0.732 0.743 0.743 0.736 0.751 0.754 –4 0.82 0.86 0.23 0.60 102 Lebanon .. .. 0.750 0.763 0.750 0.733 0.755 0.752 –12 .. .. 0.02 .. 103 Saint Lucia 0.683 0.710 0.749 0.757 0.734 0.724 0.747 0.748 –11 0.39 0.54 –0.01 0.28 104 Mongolia 0.593 0.611 0.714 0.753 0.741 0.727 0.742 0.747 –11 0.30 1.57 0.35 0.70 105 Tunisia 0.569 0.654 0.717 0.728 0.733 0.728 0.745 0.746 –4 1.40 0.92 0.31 0.82 106 South Africa 0.633 0.618 0.669 0.722 0.724 0.721 0.737 0.741 –1 –0.24 0.80 0.79 0.48 107 Uzbekistan .. 0.603 0.681 0.707 0.723 0.727 0.737 0.740 7 .. 1.22 0.64 .. 108 Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 0.552 0.630 0.677 0.704 0.697 0.693 0.727 0.733 8 1.33 0.72 0.61 0.86 108 Gabon 0.621 0.652 0.684 0.720 0.732 0.720 0.730 0.733 –1 0.49 0.48 0.53 0.50 108 Marshall Islands .. .. .. 0.691 0.722 0.723 0.732 0.733 11 .. .. .. .. 111 Botswana 0.590 0.594 0.652 0.690 0.718 0.700 0.729 0.731 9 0.07 0.94 0.88 0.65 111 Fiji 0.629 0.668 0.697 0.715 0.718 0.705 0.726 0.731 –1 0.60 0.43 0.37 0.46 113 Indonesia 0.531 0.600 0.670 0.701 0.710 0.707 0.726 0.728 4 1.23 1.11 0.64 0.96 114 Suriname .. .. 0.707 0.718 0.714 0.697 0.719 0.722 –6 .. .. 0.16 .. 115 Belize 0.617 0.671 0.727 0.721 0.713 0.713 0.717 0.721 –9 0.84 0.80 –0.06 0.47 115 Libya 0.690 0.727 0.755 0.728 0.688 0.729 0.741 0.721 –14 0.52 0.38 –0.35 0.13 117 Jamaica 0.662 0.659 0.708 0.713 0.711 0.703 0.718 0.720 –6 –0.05 0.72 0.13 0.25 117 Kyrgyzstan 0.649 0.627 0.668 0.695 0.700 0.704 0.717 0.720 1 –0.34 0.64 0.58 0.32 117 Philippines 0.593 0.632 0.669 0.690 0.699 0.690 0.714 0.720 3 0.64 0.57 0.57 0.59 120 Morocco 0.451 0.528 0.607 0.659 0.683 0.690 0.704 0.710 7 1.59 1.40 1.21 1.38 121 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 0.658 0.703 0.764 0.768 0.699 0.696 0.706 0.709 –37 0.66 0.84 –0.57 0.23 122 Samoa .. 0.676 0.708 0.708 0.708 0.706 0.703 0.708 –9 .. 0.46 0.00 .. 123 Nicaragua 0.515 0.593 0.651 0.679 0.676 0.682 0.701 0.706 0 1.42 0.94 0.63 0.96 124 Nauru .. .. 0.616 0.660 0.684 0.692 0.700 0.703 2 .. .. 1.02 .. Continued → 280 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 2 Change in Human Development Index (HDI) HDI rank Average annual HDI growth Value (%) HDI RANK 1990 2000 2010 2015 2020 2021 2022 2023 2015–2023a 1990–2000 2000–2010 2010–2023 1990–2023 Medium human development 125 Bhutan .. .. 0.593 0.637 0.688 0.691 0.695 0.698 9 .. .. 1.26 .. 126 Eswatini (Kingdom of) 0.570 0.493 0.534 0.607 0.657 0.658 0.695 0.695 16 –1.44 0.80 2.05 0.60 126 Iraq 0.531 0.592 0.650 0.675 0.680 0.687 0.695 0.695 –2 1.09 0.94 0.52 0.82 128 Tajikistan .. 0.554 0.639 0.658 0.664 0.672 0.687 0.691 0 .. 1.44 0.60 .. 129 Tuvalu 0.566 0.610 0.636 0.658 0.681 0.681 0.686 0.689 –1 0.75 0.42 0.62 0.60 130 Bangladesh 0.397 0.477 0.561 0.621 0.663 0.663 0.680 0.685 9 1.85 1.64 1.55 1.67 130 India 0.446 0.501 0.590 0.633 0.652 0.647 0.676 0.685 5 1.17 1.65 1.16 1.31 132 El Salvador 0.523 0.607 0.660 0.667 0.660 0.663 0.674 0.678 –7 1.50 0.84 0.21 0.79 133 Equatorial Guinea .. 0.508 0.612 0.656 0.668 0.671 0.677 0.674 –2 .. 1.88 0.75 .. 133 Palestine, State of .. .. 0.691 0.712 0.718 0.718 0.733 0.674 –21 .. .. –0.19 .. 135 Cabo Verde .. 0.585 0.648 0.658 0.647 0.651 0.664 0.668 –7 .. 1.03 0.23 .. 136 Namibia 0.597 0.561 0.591 0.630 0.647 0.631 0.649 0.665 0 –0.62 0.52 0.91 0.33 137 Guatemala 0.499 0.563 0.623 0.638 0.645 0.639 0.655 0.662 –4 1.21 1.02 0.47 0.86 138 Congo 0.573 0.545 0.609 0.643 0.643 0.643 0.644 0.649 –6 –0.50 1.12 0.49 0.38 139 Honduras 0.516 0.558 0.596 0.610 0.625 0.628 0.643 0.645 1 0.79 0.66 0.61 0.68 140 Kiribati .. .. 0.600 0.623 0.632 0.631 0.642 0.644 –2 .. .. 0.55 .. 141 Sao Tome and Principe .. .. 0.564 0.608 0.628 0.631 0.636 0.637 0 .. .. 0.94 .. 142 Timor-Leste .. 0.507 0.645 0.628 0.650 0.644 0.633 0.634 –5 .. 2.44 –0.13 .. 143 Ghana 0.432 0.487 0.558 0.588 0.614 0.618 0.625 0.628 4 1.21 1.37 0.91 1.14 143 Kenya 0.485 0.500 0.552 0.583 0.600 0.608 0.626 0.628 5 0.31 0.99 1.00 0.79 145 Nepal 0.404 0.471 0.551 0.575 0.599 0.596 0.605 0.622 5 1.55 1.58 0.94 1.32 146 Vanuatu .. .. 0.582 0.599 0.617 0.615 0.621 0.621 0 .. .. 0.50 .. 147 Lao People's Democratic Republic 0.409 0.473 0.556 0.604 0.616 0.613 0.614 0.617 –4 1.46 1.63 0.80 1.25 148 Angola .. 0.391 0.528 0.603 0.610 0.609 0.615 0.616 –3 .. 3.05 1.19 .. 149 Micronesia (Federated States of) .. 0.596 0.603 0.604 0.609 0.611 0.614 0.615 –6 .. 0.12 0.15 .. 150 Myanmar 0.347 0.415 0.515 0.566 0.609 0.605 0.606 0.609 3 1.81 2.18 1.30 1.72 151 Cambodia 0.387 0.438 0.543 0.562 0.595 0.594 0.602 0.606 5 1.25 2.17 0.85 1.37 152 Comoros .. 0.461 0.534 0.565 0.592 0.594 0.602 0.603 2 .. 1.48 0.94 .. 153 Zimbabwe 0.500 0.458 0.512 0.567 0.582 0.581 0.594 0.598 –1 –0.87 1.12 1.20 0.54 154 Zambia 0.422 0.429 0.533 0.565 0.578 0.574 0.589 0.595 0 0.16 2.19 0.85 1.05 155 Cameroon 0.448 0.439 0.529 0.575 0.579 0.574 0.581 0.588 –5 –0.20 1.88 0.82 0.83 156 Solomon Islands .. 0.547 0.564 0.576 0.579 0.577 0.583 0.584 –7 .. 0.31 0.27 .. 157 Côte d'Ivoire 0.389 0.419 0.465 0.519 0.553 0.557 0.565 0.582 10 0.75 1.05 1.74 1.23 157 Uganda 0.342 0.407 0.514 0.547 0.571 0.573 0.578 0.582 3 1.76 2.36 0.96 1.62 159 Rwanda .. 0.340 0.504 0.525 0.555 0.562 0.570 0.578 5 .. 4.01 1.06 .. 160 Papua New Guinea 0.403 0.456 0.503 0.543 0.567 0.567 0.572 0.576 1 1.24 0.99 1.05 1.09 161 Togo 0.412 0.448 0.483 0.523 0.554 0.560 0.567 0.571 4 0.84 0.76 1.30 0.99 162 Syrian Arab Republic 0.572 0.594 0.669 0.549 0.570 0.571 0.571 0.564 –3 0.38 1.20 –1.30 –0.04 163 Mauritania 0.396 0.468 0.525 0.551 0.554 0.553 0.562 0.563 –5 1.68 1.16 0.54 1.07 164 Nigeria 0.379 0.435 0.502 0.530 0.547 0.554 0.557 0.560 –2 1.39 1.44 0.84 1.19 165 Tanzania (United Republic of) 0.381 0.414 0.513 0.520 0.554 0.548 0.554 0.555 1 0.83 2.17 0.61 1.15 166 Haiti 0.461 0.497 0.452 0.552 0.555 0.548 0.552 0.554 –9 0.75 –0.94 1.58 0.56 167 Lesotho 0.483 0.462 0.478 0.517 0.537 0.532 0.547 0.550 1 –0.44 0.34 1.09 0.39 Low human development 168 Pakistan 0.396 0.436 0.500 0.527 0.536 0.537 0.544 0.544 –5 0.97 1.38 0.65 0.97 169 Senegal 0.377 0.398 0.477 0.509 0.522 0.522 0.526 0.530 1 0.54 1.83 0.81 1.04 170 Gambia 0.331 0.403 0.463 0.482 0.512 0.513 0.519 0.524 5 1.99 1.40 0.96 1.40 171 Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 0.388 0.391 0.440 0.477 0.506 0.508 0.514 0.522 8 0.08 1.19 1.32 0.90 172 Malawi 0.306 0.394 0.475 0.504 0.512 0.509 0.513 0.517 –1 2.56 1.89 0.65 1.60 173 Benin 0.351 0.415 0.485 0.511 0.504 0.506 0.512 0.515 –4 1.69 1.57 0.46 1.17 174 Guinea-Bissau .. .. 0.452 0.481 0.498 0.502 0.511 0.514 2 .. .. 0.99 .. 175 Djibouti .. 0.337 0.421 0.469 0.499 0.501 0.510 0.513 6 .. 2.25 1.53 .. 176 Sudan .. .. 0.479 0.498 0.513 0.512 0.516 0.511 –3 .. .. 0.50 .. 177 Liberia .. 0.443 0.467 0.480 0.498 0.503 0.508 0.510 0 .. 0.53 0.68 .. 178 Eritrea .. .. 0.465 0.480 0.495 0.496 0.499 0.503 –1 .. .. 0.61 .. 179 Guinea 0.282 0.359 0.430 0.465 0.488 0.490 0.498 0.500 3 2.44 1.82 1.17 1.75 180 Ethiopia .. 0.293 0.415 0.456 0.486 0.487 0.494 0.497 4 .. 3.54 1.40 .. 181 Afghanistan 0.285 0.351 0.465 0.496 0.501 0.486 0.495 0.496 –7 2.10 2.85 0.50 1.69 182 Mozambique 0.246 0.311 0.419 0.457 0.477 0.478 0.490 0.493 1 2.37 3.03 1.26 2.13 183 Madagascar .. 0.443 0.493 0.501 0.483 0.481 0.483 0.487 –11 .. 1.08 –0.09 .. 184 Yemen 0.359 0.439 0.502 0.475 0.459 0.458 0.466 0.470 –4 2.03 1.35 –0.51 0.82 185 Sierra Leone 0.313 0.318 0.410 0.432 0.454 0.458 0.463 0.467 0 0.16 2.57 1.01 1.22 Continued → TABLE 2 / HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX TRENDS, 1990–2023 281 TABLE 2 Change in Human Development Index (HDI) HDI rank Average annual HDI growth Value (%) HDI RANK 1990 2000 2010 2015 2020 2021 2022 2023 2015–2023a 1990–2000 2000–2010 2010–2023 1990–2023 186 Burkina Faso .. .. 0.377 0.419 0.453 0.454 0.457 0.459 1 .. .. 1.53 .. 187 Burundi 0.294 0.308 0.416 0.432 0.435 0.435 0.437 0.439 –2 0.47 3.05 0.41 1.22 188 Mali 0.240 0.320 0.410 0.413 0.414 0.414 0.417 0.419 0 2.92 2.51 0.17 1.70 188 Niger 0.215 0.266 0.339 0.374 0.404 0.413 0.414 0.419 3 2.15 2.45 1.64 2.04 190 Chad .. 0.303 0.375 0.396 0.408 0.408 0.414 0.416 –1 .. 2.15 0.80 .. 191 Central African Republic 0.342 0.333 0.358 0.377 0.386 0.339 .. 0.414 –1 –0.27 0.73 1.12 0.58 192 Somalia .. .. .. .. .. .. 0.385 0.404 .. .. .. .. .. 193 South Sudan .. .. 0.420 0.317 0.398 0.393 0.388 0.388 0 .. .. –0.61 .. Other countries or territories Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Monaco .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Human development groups Very high human development 0.797 0.838 0.879 0.898 0.901 0.903 0.908 0.914 — 0.50 0.48 0.30 0.42 High human development 0.569 0.636 0.714 0.744 0.763 0.766 0.774 0.777 — 1.12 1.16 0.65 0.95 Medium human development 0.439 0.491 0.573 0.611 0.631 0.629 0.649 0.656 — 1.13 1.56 1.05 1.22 Low human development 0.346 0.393 0.467 0.491 0.507 0.507 0.512 0.515 — 1.28 1.74 0.76 1.21 Developing countries 0.520 0.576 0.649 0.680 0.696 0.696 0.708 0.712 — 1.03 1.20 0.72 0.96 Regions Arab States 0.550 0.615 0.670 0.693 0.707 0.710 0.716 0.719 — 1.12 0.86 0.54 0.82 East Asia and the Pacific 0.514 0.604 0.699 0.735 0.764 0.768 0.773 0.775 — 1.63 1.47 0.80 1.25 Europe and Central Asia 0.674 0.686 0.753 0.789 0.802 0.803 0.815 0.818 — 0.18 0.94 0.64 0.59 Latin America and the Caribbean 0.648 0.697 0.747 0.767 0.764 0.762 0.778 0.783 — 0.73 0.70 0.36 0.58 South Asia 0.454 0.508 0.590 0.627 0.645 0.641 0.665 0.672 — 1.13 1.51 1.01 1.20 Sub-Saharan Africa 0.405 0.435 0.510 0.540 0.557 0.558 0.565 0.568 — 0.72 1.60 0.83 1.03 Least developed countries 0.360 0.411 0.494 0.526 0.550 0.549 0.555 0.560 — 1.33 1.86 0.97 1.35 Small island developing states 0.617 b 0.660 0.702 0.727 0.731 0.727 0.737 0.739 — 0.68 0.62 0.40 0.55 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 0.801 0.846 0.883 0.899 0.903 0.904 0.910 0.916 — 0.55 0.43 0.28 0.41 World 0.608 0.651 0.707 0.731 0.742 0.742 0.752 0.756 — 0.69 0.83 0.52 0.66 Notes Definitions Main data sources For HDI values that are comparable across years and countries, Human Development Index (HDI): A composite index Columns 1–8: HDRO calculations based on data from Barro use this table or the interpolated data at https://hdr.undp.org/ measuring average achievement in three basic dimensions of and Lee (2018), IMF (2024), UNDESA (2024a), UNESCO In- en/data, which present trends using consistent data. human development—a long and healthy life, knowledge and stitute for Statistics (2024), United Nations Statistics Division a decent standard of living. See Technical note 1 at https://hdr. (2025) and World Bank (2024a). a A positive value indicates an improvement in rank. undp.org/sites/default/files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_technical_ Column 9: Calculated based on data in columns 4 and 8. b Value reported with relaxed aggregation rule. For details, notes.pdf for details on how the HDI is calculated. see Reader’s guide. Columns 10–13: Calculated based on data in columns 1, 2, 3 Average annual HDI growth: A smoothed annualized growth of and 8. the HDI in a given period, calculated as the annual compound growth rate. 282 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 3 Inequality‑adjusted Human Development Index SDG 10.1 Inequality- adjusted Inequality- Inequality- Human Coefficient Inequality life Inequality adjusted adjusted Development of human in life expectancy in education Inequality income Gini Index (HDI) Inequality-adjusted HDI (IHDI) inequality expectancy index educationa index in income index Income shares held by coefficient Overall Difference (%) loss from HDI Poorest Richest Richest Value Value (%) rankb (%) Value (%) Value (%) Value 40 percent 10 percent 1 percent HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023c 2023 2023d 2023 2022e 2022 2010–2023f 2010–2023f 2023 2010–2023f Very high human development 1 Iceland 0.972 0.923 5.0 0 5.0 2.0 0.945 2.3 0.942 10.7 0.882 23.9 22.0 8.0 26.1 2 Norway 0.970 0.909 6.3 0 6.2 2.4 0.950 1.8 0.921 14.3 0.857 22.9 22.4 9.3 27.7 2 Switzerland 0.970 0.894 7.8 –2 7.5 3.1 0.953 1.8 0.912 17.7 0.823 19.7 26.4 9.8 33.7 4 Denmark 0.962 0.909 5.5 2 5.5 3.1 0.924 2.3 0.913 11.0 0.890 23.1 23.8 12.0 28.3 5 Germany 0.959 0.890 7.2 –3 7.1 3.2 0.914 3.7 0.922 14.3 0.836 20.6 25.0 12.8 32.4 5 Sweden 0.959 0.886 7.6 –4 7.4 2.6 0.948 2.6 0.901 16.9 0.815 21.5 22.7 10.9 29.8 7 Australia 0.958 0.873 8.9 –5 8.6 3.0 0.954 4.3 0.889 18.5 0.784 19.6 26.2 9.9 34.3 8 Hong Kong, China (SAR) 0.955 0.839 12.1 –16 11.7 2.3 0.977 8.7 0.805 24.1 0.750 .. .. 17.9 .. 8 Netherlands 0.955 0.892 6.6 3 6.4 3.3 0.925 4.7 0.879 11.4 0.874 24.0 21.4 6.8 25.7 10 Belgium 0.951 0.891 6.3 4 6.3 3.5 0.922 4.0 0.886 11.3 0.865 23.6 21.9 8.5 26.6 11 Ireland 0.949 0.886 6.6 2 6.5 3.1 0.930 2.6 0.868 14.0 0.860 22.0 24.8 13.6 30.1 12 Finland 0.948 0.891 6.0 6 5.9 2.9 0.925 2.0 0.914 12.8 0.836 23.2 22.9 11.1 27.7 13 Singapore 0.946 0.823 13.0 –19 12.4 2.6 0.955 8.7 0.790 25.9 0.741 .. .. 14.2 .. 13 United Kingdom 0.946 0.869 8.1 0 7.9 3.9 0.907 3.2 0.915 16.7 0.792 20.2 24.6 13.1 32.4 15 United Arab Emirates 0.940 0.866 7.9 –1 7.9 3.9 0.930 9.3 0.786 10.4 0.889 23.0 20.5 16.1 26.4 16 Canada 0.939 0.867 7.7 2 7.5 4.3 0.923 2.2 0.884 16.0 0.800 20.5 24.0 11.6 31.7 17 Liechtenstein 0.938 .. .. .. .. 4.9 0.931 .. .. .. .. .. .. 11.5 .. 17 New Zealand 0.938 0.853 9.1 –2 8.8 4.4 0.913 4.1 0.892 18.1 0.762 .. .. 12.1 .. 17 United States 0.938 0.832 11.3 –12 10.7 5.5 0.862 2.7 0.882 23.9 0.759 15.6 30.2 20.7 41.3 20 Korea (Republic of) 0.937 0.857 8.5 1 8.4 2.5 0.965 6.2 0.831 16.4 0.784 19.9 24.6 15.1 32.9 21 Slovenia 0.931 0.885 4.9 9 4.9 2.6 0.923 2.0 0.899 10.0 0.834 24.9 20.6 8.0 24.3 22 Austria 0.930 0.861 7.4 4 7.1 3.2 0.923 2.6 0.842 15.6 0.823 21.0 23.8 11.5 30.7 23 Japan 0.925 0.845 8.6 2 8.5 2.5 0.970 5.8 0.805 17.1 0.772 20.8 26.1 12.7 32.9 24 Malta 0.924 0.843 8.8 2 8.6 5.2 0.923 5.2 0.812 15.5 0.799 21.0 25.1 9.0 31.4 25 Luxembourg 0.922 0.838 9.1 –1 8.9 4.8 0.911 5.4 0.774 16.4 0.836 19.5 24.5 13.1 32.7 26 France 0.920 0.836 9.1 –2 9.0 3.7 0.938 5.3 0.795 17.9 0.783 20.8 24.9 12.1 31.5 27 Israel 0.919 0.813 11.5 –11 11.0 3.6 0.926 5.3 0.820 24.0 0.709 16.6 26.6 16.8 37.9 28 Spain 0.918 0.819 10.8 –6 10.5 2.8 0.952 9.6 0.772 19.2 0.749 18.7 24.7 12.1 33.9 29 Czechia 0.915 0.867 5.2 14 5.1 3.0 0.893 1.2 0.888 11.1 0.823 24.1 22.2 9.7 26.2 29 Italy 0.915 0.817 10.7 –7 10.3 2.6 0.955 7.5 0.763 20.8 0.749 18.6 26.2 12.3 34.8 29 San Marino 0.915 .. .. .. .. 1.8 0.982 4.1 0.752 .. .. .. .. 11.5 .. 32 Andorra 0.913 0.837 8.3 4 8.2 4.7 0.939 5.6 0.747 14.4 0.837 .. .. 11.5 .. 32 Cyprus 0.913 0.841 7.9 8 7.7 2.9 0.921 5.4 0.822 14.8 0.787 21.4 25.7 8.4 31.3 34 Greece 0.908 0.825 9.1 1 8.9 3.3 0.921 6.7 0.826 16.8 0.739 19.6 24.8 14.3 32.9 35 Poland 0.906 0.817 9.8 –2 9.5 3.9 0.867 4.8 0.861 19.8 0.732 22.4 22.8 15.2 28.5 36 Estonia 0.905 0.841 7.1 12 6.8 3.0 0.883 1.6 0.881 15.7 0.766 20.4 24.3 12.8 31.8 37 Saudi Arabia 0.900 .. .. .. .. 5.1 0.857 12.8 0.748 .. .. .. .. 25.2 .. 38 Bahrain 0.899 .. .. .. .. 4.7 0.898 13.2 0.706 .. .. .. .. 25.5 .. 39 Lithuania 0.895 0.812 9.3 –3 8.8 4.1 0.826 2.0 0.893 20.4 0.726 18.7 29.1 9.6 36.7 40 Portugal 0.890 0.795 10.7 –4 10.4 3.1 0.929 9.8 0.730 18.4 0.742 19.6 27.5 9.7 34.6 41 Croatia 0.889 0.828 6.9 7 6.7 3.6 0.869 3.0 0.832 13.5 0.787 21.8 22.3 9.0 28.9 41 Latvia 0.889 0.812 8.7 –1 8.3 4.2 0.828 1.7 0.889 19.0 0.727 19.2 26.2 10.7 34.3 43 Qatar 0.886 .. .. .. .. 3.7 0.924 10.1 0.651 .. .. 18.1 25.8 24.3 35.1 44 Slovakia 0.880 0.833 5.3 11 5.3 4.6 0.857 1.5 0.839 10.0 0.803 24.3 19.1 9.2 24.1 45 Chile 0.878 0.723 17.7 –16 16.1 4.6 0.898 6.0 0.795 37.7 0.530 15.8 34.5 22.0 43.0 46 Hungary 0.870 0.819 5.9 8 5.9 3.7 0.845 2.5 0.819 11.3 0.793 22.2 24.1 9.8 29.2 47 Argentina 0.865 0.761 12.0 –3 11.6 7.4 0.818 4.9 0.830 22.6 0.650 15.5 29.8 12.4 40.7 48 Montenegro 0.862 0.771 10.6 1 10.4 3.3 0.849 7.8 0.790 19.9 0.682 18.3 24.7 9.9 34.3 48 Uruguay 0.862 0.747 13.3 –10 12.9 5.9 0.842 7.6 0.773 25.1 0.640 15.9 30.5 14.8 40.6 50 Oman 0.858 0.750 12.6 –6 12.3 6.6 0.862 6.5 0.720 23.7 0.679 .. .. 19.9 .. 51 Türkiye 0.853 0.708 17.0 –14 16.5 8.1 0.808 12.4 0.700 28.9 0.628 14.7 34.7 24.4 44.4 52 Kuwait 0.852 .. .. .. .. 5.8 0.876 22.1 0.541 .. .. .. .. 17.6 .. 53 Antigua and Barbuda 0.851 .. .. .. .. 6.8 0.826 9.9 0.738 .. .. .. .. 21.2 .. 54 Seychelles 0.848 0.755 11.0 –2 10.8 9.3 0.738 6.7 0.815 16.6 0.715 19.7 23.9 20.5 32.1 55 Bulgaria 0.845 0.748 11.5 –4 11.0 4.9 0.814 4.3 0.772 23.7 0.665 17.1 29.9 16.9 39.0 55 Romania 0.845 0.758 10.3 2 9.8 4.9 0.818 3.7 0.746 20.9 0.714 18.4 24.0 13.4 33.9 57 Georgia 0.844 0.754 10.7 0 10.3 6.9 0.781 2.4 0.867 21.4 0.633 19.3 25.2 18.5 33.5 Continued → TABLE 3 / INEQUALITY-ADJUSTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX 283 TABLE 3 SDG 10.1 Inequality- adjusted Inequality- Inequality- Human Coefficient Inequality life Inequality adjusted adjusted Development of human in life expectancy in education Inequality income Gini Index (HDI) Inequality-adjusted HDI (IHDI) inequality expectancy index educationa index in income index Income shares held by coefficient Overall Difference (%) loss from HDI Poorest Richest Richest Value Value (%) rankb (%) Value (%) Value (%) Value 40 percent 10 percent 1 percent HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023c 2023 2023d 2023 2022e 2022 2010–2023f 2010–2023f 2023 2010–2023f 58 Saint Kitts and Nevis 0.840 .. .. .. .. 9.9 0.723 .. .. .. .. .. .. 21.2 .. 59 Panama 0.839 0.664 20.9 –19 19.6 10.1 0.825 9.9 0.659 38.9 0.539 12.1 36.9 17.9 48.9 60 Brunei Darussalam 0.837 0.756 9.7 4 9.7 6.9 0.792 10.1 0.620 12.1 0.879 .. .. 13.1 .. 60 Kazakhstan 0.837 0.766 8.5 8 8.3 7.2 0.777 3.2 0.782 14.7 0.739 22.9 24.8 14.9 29.2 62 Costa Rica 0.833 0.678 18.6 –11 17.5 6.0 0.879 11.0 0.667 35.6 0.531 13.2 35.1 18.2 46.7 62 Serbia 0.833 0.772 7.3 13 7.3 4.2 0.836 4.1 0.773 13.5 0.712 20.0 25.9 12.5 33.1 64 Russian Federation 0.832 0.758 8.9 10 8.6 5.7 0.771 1.5 0.768 18.7 0.734 18.7 26.6 23.8 35.1 65 Belarus 0.824 0.771 6.4 15 6.3 3.5 0.808 2.8 0.770 12.7 0.737 24.8 20.7 9.6 24.4 66 Bahamas 0.820 0.670 18.3 –9 16.8 9.5 0.760 3.4 0.732 37.6 0.541 .. .. 17.9 .. 67 Malaysia 0.819 0.707 13.7 –2 13.3 6.1 0.819 9.0 0.657 24.8 0.658 16.1 30.9 14.9 40.7 68 North Macedonia 0.815 0.723 11.3 4 11.0 4.3 0.845 8.4 0.689 20.5 0.649 18.1 22.9 6.9 33.5 69 Armenia 0.811 0.743 8.4 7 8.3 6.7 0.799 2.9 0.755 15.1 0.681 22.8 23.0 15.0 27.9 69 Barbados 0.811 0.620 23.6 –22 20.6 7.2 0.802 5.5 0.749 49.0 0.397 .. .. 21.2 .. 71 Albania 0.810 0.705 13.0 1 12.8 6.4 0.859 12.3 0.651 19.7 0.627 21.6 22.8 8.9 29.4 72 Trinidad and Tobago 0.807 .. .. .. .. 10.7 0.735 5.9 0.711 .. .. .. .. 17.9 .. 73 Mauritius 0.806 0.669 17.0 –5 16.2 9.8 0.762 7.4 0.676 31.4 0.581 18.8 29.9 15.9 36.8 74 Bosnia and Herzegovina 0.804 0.689 14.3 2 13.8 4.7 0.848 10.1 0.657 26.5 0.587 19.8 25.1 9.3 33.0 High human development 75 Iran (Islamic Republic of) 0.799 0.643 19.5 –8 19.1 7.9 0.817 21.9 0.586 27.5 0.556 19.1 26.8 18.3 34.8 76 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 0.798 .. .. .. .. 10.3 0.707 6.1 0.778 .. .. .. .. 21.2 .. 76 Thailand 0.798 0.677 15.2 1 15.0 7.3 0.804 16.0 0.612 21.7 0.630 19.1 27.1 19.8 34.9 78 China 0.797 0.670 15.9 1 15.2 5.1 0.846 10.3 0.626 30.3 0.568 18.8 28.2 15.8 35.7 79 Peru 0.794 0.633 20.3 –10 19.9 9.7 0.802 19.3 0.608 30.6 0.520 16.2 30.7 26.9 40.3 80 Grenada 0.791 .. .. .. .. 10.1 0.763 7.0 0.721 .. .. 15.2 33.7 21.2 43.8 81 Azerbaijan 0.789 0.735 6.8 15 6.8 10.4 0.750 4.3 0.696 5.7 0.759 .. .. 14.0 .. 81 Mexico 0.789 0.646 18.1 –3 17.8 9.0 0.771 16.0 0.600 28.4 0.582 15.4 34.4 21.6 43.5 83 Colombia 0.788 0.593 24.7 –24 23.1 8.3 0.815 17.0 0.579 44.0 0.442 10.3 43.5 17.9 54.8 84 Brazil 0.786 0.594 24.4 –21 22.8 9.5 0.777 15.1 0.611 43.7 0.441 11.3 41.0 21.1 52.0 84 Palau 0.786 0.616 21.6 –11 20.1 13.6 0.655 5.8 0.786 40.9 0.453 .. .. 16.1 .. 86 Moldova (Republic of) 0.785 0.719 8.4 17 8.3 9.1 0.716 2.2 0.783 13.6 0.662 24.3 22.1 10.4 25.7 87 Ukraine 0.779 0.715 8.2 17 8.1 7.3 0.762 3.6 0.714 13.3 0.672 24.3 21.7 9.3 25.6 88 Ecuador 0.777 0.640 17.6 1 17.0 8.4 0.809 12.1 0.625 30.6 0.518 14.0 33.2 14.0 44.6 89 Dominican Republic 0.776 0.634 18.3 0 18.2 17.0 0.686 14.6 0.592 22.9 0.628 17.9 28.3 15.2 37.0 89 Guyana 0.776 .. .. .. .. 14.9 0.657 10.4 0.584 .. .. .. .. 17.9 .. 89 Sri Lanka 0.776 0.630 18.8 –2 17.5 4.7 0.842 11.3 0.642 36.6 0.463 18.5 30.8 20.5 37.7 92 Tonga 0.769 0.682 11.3 16 11.0 7.9 0.749 4.3 0.821 20.7 0.516 23.1 22.0 16.1 27.1 93 Maldives 0.766 0.602 21.4 –7 20.5 3.7 0.904 29.3 0.425 28.6 0.568 22.1 23.3 13.1 29.3 93 Viet Nam 0.766 0.641 16.3 6 16.3 12.7 0.733 15.3 0.618 21.1 0.581 18.6 28.1 15.7 36.1 95 Turkmenistan 0.764 .. .. .. .. 19.3 0.622 2.9 0.720 .. .. .. .. 19.5 .. 96 Algeria 0.763 0.601 21.2 –6 20.7 11.9 0.763 33.3 0.452 16.8 0.631 23.1 22.9 23.3 27.6 97 Cuba 0.762 .. .. .. .. 4.8 0.851 9.1 0.673 .. .. .. .. 13.7 .. 98 Dominica 0.761 .. .. .. .. 17.3 0.651 16.2 0.612 .. .. .. .. 21.2 .. 99 Paraguay 0.756 0.599 20.8 –6 20.0 10.6 0.740 14.7 0.585 34.6 0.497 14.5 35.4 17.9 45.1 100 Egypt 0.754 0.582 22.8 –13 22.0 10.4 0.711 36.9 0.443 18.7 0.625 21.8 27.5 19.1 31.9 100 Jordan 0.754 0.637 15.5 8 15.3 8.8 0.811 13.0 0.614 24.1 0.519 20.3 27.4 20.4 33.7 102 Lebanon 0.752 .. .. .. .. 10.9 0.792 .. .. 20.2 0.570 20.6 24.7 21.3 31.8 103 Saint Lucia 0.748 0.523 30.1 –20 29.1 10.6 0.725 37.4 0.401 39.2 0.491 15.1 34.1 21.2 43.7 104 Mongolia 0.747 0.647 13.4 16 13.3 8.8 0.726 11.9 0.610 19.2 0.610 20.8 24.6 16.1 31.4 105 Tunisia 0.746 0.595 20.2 –4 19.7 7.2 0.807 29.1 0.469 22.9 0.558 20.0 27.0 22.6 33.7 106 South Africa 0.741 0.476 35.8 –29 32.4 19.8 0.569 17.3 0.637 59.9 0.298 7.2 50.5 19.4 63.0 107 Uzbekistan 0.740 .. .. .. .. 8.9 0.735 1.8 0.730 .. .. 20.4 23.2 16.7 31.2 108 Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 0.733 0.578 21.1 –8 21.0 21.0 0.590 15.0 0.652 26.9 0.502 15.7 30.3 17.9 40.9 108 Gabon 0.733 0.558 23.9 –10 23.7 19.0 0.602 20.6 0.531 31.4 0.543 16.8 27.7 11.0 38.0 108 Marshall Islands 0.733 0.626 14.6 10 14.3 16.4 0.604 4.0 0.809 22.5 0.501 18.9 27.5 16.1 35.5 111 Botswana 0.731 0.509 30.4 –16 29.3 19.2 0.611 23.3 0.511 45.5 0.423 10.9 41.5 22.7 53.3 111 Fiji 0.731 0.626 14.4 13 14.2 15.5 0.615 8.6 0.667 18.5 0.598 21.3 24.2 16.1 30.7 113 Indonesia 0.728 0.608 16.5 10 16.4 12.5 0.688 12.9 0.575 23.6 0.568 19.5 29.9 17.9 36.1 114 Suriname 0.722 .. .. .. .. 10.8 0.736 18.4 0.478 .. .. 17.0 30.1 17.9 39.2 Continued → 284 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 3 SDG 10.1 Inequality- adjusted Inequality- Inequality- Human Coefficient Inequality life Inequality adjusted adjusted Development of human in life expectancy in education Inequality income Gini Index (HDI) Inequality-adjusted HDI (IHDI) inequality expectancy index educationa index in income index Income shares held by coefficient Overall Difference (%) loss from HDI Poorest Richest Richest Value Value (%) rankb (%) Value (%) Value (%) Value 40 percent 10 percent 1 percent HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023c 2023 2023d 2023 2022e 2022 2010–2023f 2010–2023f 2023 2010–2023f 115 Belize 0.721 .. .. .. .. 7.3 0.764 14.8 0.532 .. .. .. .. 17.9 .. 115 Libya 0.721 .. .. .. .. 16.8 0.631 .. .. .. .. .. .. 16.8 .. 117 Jamaica 0.720 0.590 18.1 0 17.0 11.6 0.700 5.8 0.637 33.7 0.462 16.0 29.9 17.9 40.2 117 Kyrgyzstan 0.720 0.649 9.9 26 9.7 10.3 0.713 3.4 0.730 15.3 0.525 23.8 22.0 18.1 26.4 117 Philippines 0.720 0.597 17.1 5 16.8 15.0 0.652 12.0 0.606 23.6 0.540 16.9 32.5 16.6 40.7 120 Morocco 0.710 0.517 27.2 –9 26.1 10.6 0.761 41.9 0.364 25.9 0.499 17.4 31.9 13.4 39.5 121 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 0.709 0.605 14.7 14 14.5 12.6 0.706 9.7 0.616 21.1 0.509 .. .. 17.9 .. 122 Samoa 0.708 0.609 14.0 17 13.7 10.3 0.713 7.0 0.672 23.7 0.471 17.8 31.3 16.1 38.7 123 Nicaragua 0.706 0.535 24.2 –1 23.5 9.4 0.766 25.8 0.483 35.3 0.414 14.3 37.2 17.9 46.2 124 Nauru 0.703 0.599 14.8 14 14.7 16.8 0.539 8.7 0.613 18.5 0.650 20.5 25.3 16.1 32.4 Medium human development 125 Bhutan 0.698 0.478 31.5 –10 30.0 13.1 0.708 48.2 0.290 28.6 0.532 22.3 22.7 14.0 28.5 126 Eswatini (Kingdom of) 0.695 0.431 38.0 –21 35.1 23.7 0.518 21.0 0.564 60.5 0.274 10.5 42.7 19.3 54.6 126 Iraq 0.695 0.534 23.2 0 22.8 13.3 0.698 29.7 0.400 25.5 0.545 21.9 23.7 15.7 29.5 128 Tajikistan 0.691 0.594 14.0 14 13.9 15.7 0.671 6.0 0.636 19.9 0.490 19.4 26.4 14.5 34.0 129 Tuvalu 0.689 0.578 16.1 10 15.8 13.1 0.630 9.2 0.638 25.1 0.480 17.4 30.8 16.1 39.1 130 Bangladesh 0.685 0.482 29.6 –3 29.0 15.8 0.709 35.3 0.368 35.9 0.430 20.4 27.4 16.2 33.4 130 India 0.685 0.475 30.7 –10 29.9 15.5 0.676 36.9 0.372 37.4 0.426 20.2 25.5 23.1 32.8 132 El Salvador 0.678 0.555 18.1 10 17.8 8.9 0.730 21.3 0.435 23.3 0.540 16.6 28.7 12.8 38.8 133 Equatorial Guinea 0.674 .. .. .. .. 28.9 0.478 .. .. .. .. .. .. 18.9 .. 133 Palestine, State of 0.674 0.538 20.2 10 19.7 18.2 0.569 9.5 0.632 31.4 0.433 19.2 25.2 18.2 33.7 135 Cabo Verde 0.668 0.478 28.4 –1 26.8 7.6 0.797 27.4 0.377 45.4 0.363 15.4 32.3 13.9 42.4 136 Namibia 0.665 0.438 34.1 –10 32.4 19.2 0.589 25.0 0.427 53.0 0.333 8.6 47.2 21.6 59.1 137 Guatemala 0.662 0.479 27.6 2 26.9 13.0 0.704 35.0 0.320 32.8 0.490 13.1 38.0 17.9 48.3 138 Congo 0.649 0.426 34.4 –11 32.0 20.1 0.563 20.9 0.498 55.1 0.276 12.4 37.9 20.5 48.9 139 Honduras 0.645 0.496 23.1 7 22.4 9.9 0.733 21.6 0.418 35.6 0.400 11.6 34.6 17.9 48.2 140 Kiribati 0.644 0.535 16.9 15 16.6 24.7 0.538 9.6 0.573 15.5 0.498 23.0 22.8 16.1 27.8 141 Sao Tome and Principe 0.637 0.478 25.0 5 23.6 9.9 0.689 18.7 0.453 42.4 0.350 16.8 32.8 16.0 40.7 142 Timor-Leste 0.634 0.451 28.9 –2 27.7 22.2 0.571 44.9 0.317 16.1 0.507 22.8 24.0 15.2 28.7 143 Ghana 0.628 0.399 36.5 –10 35.4 22.1 0.545 33.0 0.371 51.0 0.313 14.3 32.2 15.2 43.5 143 Kenya 0.628 0.456 27.4 0 26.7 20.9 0.531 19.7 0.487 39.6 0.367 18.2 31.8 15.9 38.7 145 Nepal 0.622 0.437 29.7 –2 28.9 15.0 0.659 39.8 0.320 31.9 0.397 21.8 24.2 13.7 30.0 146 Vanuatu 0.621 0.521 16.1 17 16.0 11.1 0.704 17.9 0.466 19.1 0.431 20.0 24.7 16.1 32.3 147 Lao People's Democratic Republic 0.617 0.462 25.1 5 24.9 19.7 0.605 31.3 0.322 23.6 0.507 17.8 31.2 19.7 38.8 148 Angola 0.616 0.360 41.6 –15 39.9 27.4 0.498 34.2 0.353 58.1 0.266 11.5 39.6 26.0 51.3 149 Micronesia (Federated States of) 0.615 .. .. .. .. 14.4 0.622 .. .. 25.8 0.420 16.2 29.7 16.1 40.1 150 Myanmar 0.609 0.477 21.7 10 21.6 20.5 0.574 26.9 0.389 17.6 0.485 21.9 25.5 16.7 30.7 151 Cambodia 0.606 0.444 26.7 5 26.3 14.9 0.663 28.1 0.348 35.8 0.378 .. .. 18.1 .. 152 Comoros 0.603 0.356 41.0 –14 39.7 22.2 0.560 44.4 0.317 52.4 0.255 13.6 33.6 14.2 45.3 153 Zimbabwe 0.598 0.406 32.1 1 29.9 22.3 0.511 14.6 0.517 52.9 0.253 15.1 34.8 17.5 50.3 154 Zambia 0.595 0.361 39.3 –8 35.7 23.4 0.546 20.4 0.440 63.4 0.196 11.2 39.1 18.0 51.5 155 Cameroon 0.588 0.361 38.6 –7 37.5 27.9 0.484 31.7 0.354 52.9 0.275 15.0 31.1 13.3 42.2 156 Solomon Islands 0.584 0.483 17.3 22 17.2 11.8 0.686 17.4 0.422 22.5 0.389 18.4 29.2 16.1 37.1 157 Côte d'Ivoire 0.582 0.350 39.9 –10 39.4 28.5 0.461 46.1 0.258 43.4 0.360 19.2 27.8 21.0 35.3 157 Uganda 0.582 0.400 31.3 4 30.6 20.1 0.593 27.9 0.384 43.6 0.282 16.1 34.5 21.4 42.7 159 Rwanda 0.578 0.399 31.0 5 30.2 18.9 0.596 27.4 0.372 44.3 0.285 15.8 35.6 19.9 43.7 160 Papua New Guinea 0.576 0.423 26.6 9 26.5 20.2 0.566 32.1 0.329 27.2 0.405 .. .. 16.4 .. 161 Togo 0.571 0.363 36.4 0 36.1 26.5 0.483 37.7 0.348 44.1 0.283 17.8 29.6 14.1 37.9 162 Syrian Arab Republic 0.564 .. .. .. .. 13.3 0.695 .. .. .. .. 23.2 21.1 21.6 26.6 163 Mauritania 0.563 0.374 33.6 4 32.8 19.3 0.602 44.0 0.214 35.0 0.406 20.3 24.6 10.0 32.0 164 Nigeria 0.560 0.379 32.3 6 31.7 38.6 0.325 37.8 0.339 18.6 0.494 18.7 26.7 11.6 35.1 165 Tanzania (United Republic of) 0.555 0.391 29.5 8 29.1 19.9 0.579 26.2 0.325 41.1 0.317 17.4 33.1 18.1 40.5 166 Haiti 0.554 0.337 39.2 –6 38.2 25.3 0.516 37.3 0.302 52.1 0.245 15.8 31.2 17.9 41.1 167 Lesotho 0.550 0.357 35.1 1 33.7 30.0 0.403 19.6 0.453 51.4 0.250 13.5 32.9 14.5 44.9 Low human development 168 Pakistan 0.544 0.364 33.1 7 32.6 26.0 0.542 43.5 0.205 28.2 0.435 22.7 25.5 16.7 29.6 169 Senegal 0.530 0.340 35.8 –2 34.8 18.0 0.614 47.0 0.186 39.3 0.343 18.8 28.8 13.0 36.2 170 Gambia 0.524 0.329 37.2 –4 36.4 22.2 0.549 47.0 0.215 40.1 0.302 17.5 30.5 15.9 38.8 Continued → TABLE 3 / INEQUALITY-ADJUSTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX 285 TABLE 3 SDG 10.1 Inequality- adjusted Inequality- Inequality- Human Coefficient Inequality life Inequality adjusted adjusted Development of human in life expectancy in education Inequality income Gini Index (HDI) Inequality-adjusted HDI (IHDI) inequality expectancy index educationa index in income index Income shares held by coefficient Overall Difference (%) loss from HDI Poorest Richest Richest Value Value (%) rankb (%) Value (%) Value (%) Value 40 percent 10 percent 1 percent HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023c 2023 2023d 2023 2022e 2022 2010–2023f 2010–2023f 2023 2010–2023f 171 Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 0.522 0.341 34.7 2 34.1 30.8 0.446 26.8 0.402 44.8 0.222 15.1 35.7 19.4 44.7 172 Malawi 0.517 0.365 29.4 12 29.0 19.8 0.584 28.0 0.324 39.3 0.256 18.0 31.0 15.2 38.5 173 Benin 0.515 0.316 38.6 –8 38.5 32.1 0.426 44.0 0.222 39.3 0.334 19.5 27.2 12.8 34.4 174 Guinea-Bissau 0.514 0.331 35.6 1 35.3 28.6 0.484 42.1 0.242 35.3 0.311 19.8 26.1 11.0 33.4 175 Djibouti 0.513 0.341 33.5 6 32.9 24.2 0.536 45.8 0.165 28.7 0.447 15.8 32.3 15.9 41.6 176 Sudan 0.511 0.328 35.8 1 35.3 24.1 0.541 42.5 0.214 39.3 0.306 19.9 27.8 15.4 34.2 177 Liberia 0.510 0.326 36.1 1 35.9 29.2 0.459 42.1 0.287 36.4 0.262 18.8 27.1 12.2 35.3 178 Eritrea 0.503 .. .. .. .. 19.4 0.603 .. .. .. .. .. .. 13.8 .. 179 Guinea 0.500 0.302 39.6 –4 39.0 35.4 0.405 50.1 0.185 31.6 0.367 21.6 23.1 8.7 29.6 180 Ethiopia 0.497 0.326 34.4 3 33.9 22.4 0.565 42.8 0.192 36.5 0.320 19.4 28.5 13.8 35.0 181 Afghanistan 0.496 0.321 35.3 1 34.4 25.2 0.530 48.8 0.196 29.2 0.319 .. .. 15.1 .. 182 Mozambique 0.493 0.297 39.8 –2 38.7 27.3 0.488 34.3 0.298 54.4 0.180 12.9 41.1 24.8 50.3 183 Madagascar 0.487 0.319 34.5 2 33.9 28.6 0.480 28.3 0.290 44.9 0.234 15.8 33.5 15.2 42.6 184 Yemen 0.470 0.325 30.9 5 29.8 19.7 0.609 46.4 0.209 23.2 0.269 18.8 29.4 25.0 36.7 185 Sierra Leone 0.467 0.281 39.8 –1 39.5 35.1 0.417 47.5 0.194 35.9 0.275 19.6 29.4 15.0 35.7 186 Burkina Faso 0.459 0.273 40.5 –2 40.2 31.1 0.436 46.1 0.172 43.4 0.271 18.5 30.2 14.7 37.4 187 Burundi 0.439 0.286 34.9 2 34.6 24.8 0.505 39.5 0.235 39.5 0.196 18.3 29.9 14.5 37.5 188 Mali 0.419 0.281 32.9 2 32.5 34.0 0.410 40.6 0.148 23.0 0.367 19.1 28.3 12.1 35.7 188 Niger 0.419 0.265 36.8 –1 36.7 37.7 0.395 35.0 0.181 37.4 0.262 21.1 27.8 14.1 32.9 190 Chad 0.416 0.252 39.4 –1 39.5 37.4 0.338 42.9 0.177 38.2 0.267 17.9 29.5 12.8 37.4 191 Central African Republic 0.414 0.253 38.9 1 38.5 35.0 0.374 35.2 0.220 45.5 0.198 15.3 33.1 15.6 43.0 192 Somalia 0.404 0.229 43.3 0 43.1 37.2 0.375 44.6 0.150 47.4 0.214 .. .. 16.2 .. 193 South Sudan 0.388 0.226 41.8 0 41.7 36.7 0.367 39.6 0.210 48.9 0.149 14.5 33.0 15.4 44.1 Other countries or territories .. Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of) .. .. .. .. .. 11.5 0.731 6.7 .. .. .. .. .. 14.8 .. .. Monaco .. .. .. .. .. 3.7 0.963 2.2 .. .. .. .. .. 11.5 .. Human development groups Very high human development 0.914 0.821 10.2 — 9.9 4.6 0.881 5.0 0.829 20.1 0.757 18.6 27.2 16.5 — High human development 0.777 0.640 17.6 — 17.2 8.3 0.786 13.9 0.599 29.3 0.557 17.9 30.3 17.3 — Medium human development 0.656 0.457 30.3 — 29.9 18.8 0.616 34.8 0.368 36.1 0.421 19.4 27.1 20.2 — Low human development 0.515 0.336 34.8 — 34.4 27.1 0.505 40.4 0.228 35.8 0.330 19.3 29.3 16.3 — Developing countries 0.712 0.539 24.3 — 24.0 14.6 0.684 24.8 0.459 32.5 0.498 18.6 29.0 18.3 — Regions Arab States 0.719 0.544 24.3 — 23.9 13.7 0.697 33.6 0.399 24.6 0.577 20.9 26.5 19.3 — East Asia and the Pacific 0.775 0.649 16.3 — 15.8 7.8 0.793 11.8 0.600 27.9 0.575 18.8 28.6 16.2 — Europe and Central Asia 0.818 0.719 12.1 — 11.9 8.4 0.772 6.6 0.736 20.6 0.653 19.4 27.5 17.3 — Latin America and the Caribbean 0.783 0.619 20.9 — 20.1 9.8 0.772 15.3 0.606 35.3 0.508 13.4 36.7 19.6 — South Asia 0.672 0.469 30.2 — 29.6 16.5 0.666 36.9 0.356 35.4 0.436 20.5 25.8 21.2 — Sub-Saharan Africa 0.568 0.377 33.6 — 33.6 28.0 0.471 33.4 0.328 39.4 0.346 16.7 32.2 16.0 — Least developed countries 0.560 0.374 33.2 — 32.8 23.9 0.545 35.9 0.289 38.6 0.333 18.1 30.7 16.9 — Small island developing states 0.739 0.567 23.3 — 22.9 15.1 0.677 21.0 0.503 32.7 0.535 .. .. 15.7 — Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 0.916 0.812 11.4 — 11.0 4.8 0.887 6.4 0.815 21.8 0.740 18.0 28.5 16.4 — World 0.756 0.590 22.0 — 21.6 12.9 0.715 21.5 0.514 30.4 0.559 18.7 28.6 17.9 — 286 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 3 Notes Definitions Main data sources a See https://hdr.undp.org/en/composite/IHDI for the list Human Development Index (HDI): A composite index measur- Column 1: HDRO calculations based on data from Barro and of surveys used to estimate inequalities. ing average achievement in three basic dimensions of human Lee (2018), IMF (2024), UNDESA (2024a), UNESCO Institute for development—a long and healthy life, knowledge and a decent Statistics (2024), United Nations Statistics Division (2025) and b Based on countries for which an IHDI value is calculated. standard of living. See Technical note 1 at https://hdr.undp.org/ World Bank (2024a). c Calculated by HDRO from period life tables from UNDESA sites/default/files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_technical_notes.pdf for Column 2: Calculated as the geometric mean of the values (2024a). details on how the HDI is calculated. in the inequality-adjusted life expectancy index, inequality- d Data refer to 2023 or the most recent year available. Inequality‑adjusted HDI (IHDI): HDI value adjusted for inequal- adjusted education index and inequality-adjusted income in- ities in the three basic dimensions of human development. dex using the methodology in Technical note 2 (available at e Data refer to 2022 or the most recent year available. See Technical note 2 at https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/ https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_ f Data refer to the most recent year available during the files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_technical_notes.pdf for details on technical_notes.pdf). period specified. how the IHDI is calculated. Column 3: Calculated based on data in columns 1 and 2. Overall loss: Percentage difference between the IHDI value Column 4: Calculated based on IHDI ranks and recalculated and the HDI value. HDI ranks for countries for which an IHDI value is calculated. Difference from HDI rank: Difference in ranks on the IHDI and Column 5: Calculated as the arithmetic mean of the values in the HDI, calculated only for countries for which an IHDI value inequality in life expectancy, inequality in education and in- is calculated. equality in income using the methodology in Technical note 2 Coefficient of human inequality: Average inequality in the (available at https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2025_HDR/ three basic dimensions of human development. hdr2025_technical_notes.pdf). Inequality in life expectancy: Inequality in distribution of ex- Column 6: Calculated based on complete life tables from pected length of life based on data from life tables estimated UNDESA (2024a). using the Atkinson inequality index. Column 7: Calculated based on inequality in life expectancy Inequality‑adjusted life expectancy index: HDI life expectancy and the HDI life expectancy index. index value adjusted for inequality in distribution of expected Column 8: Calculated based on data from the Center for Dis- length of life based on data from life tables listed in Main data tributive, Labor and Social Studies and the World Bank’s Socio- sources. Economic Database for Latin America and the Caribbean, Inequality in education: Inequality in distribution of years of Eurostat’s European Union Statistics on Income and Living schooling based on data from household surveys estimated us- Conditions, ICF Macro Demographic and Health Surveys, the ing the Atkinson inequality index. Luxembourg Income Study database, United Nations Children’s Fund Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys and the United Nations Inequality‑adjusted education index: HDI education index value Educational Scientific and Cultural Organization Institute for adjusted for inequality in distribution of years of schooling based Statistics using the methodology in Technical note 2 (available on data from household surveys listed in Main data sources. at https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_ Inequality in income: Inequality in income distribution based technical_notes.pdf). on data from household surveys estimated using the Atkinson Column 9: Calculated based on inequality in education and the inequality index. HDI education index. Inequality‑adjusted income index: HDI income index value ad- Column 10: UNU-WIDER 2023. justed for inequality in income distribution based on data listed in Main data sources. Column 11: Calculated based on inequality in income and the HDI income index. Income shares: Percentage share of income (or consumption) that accrues to the indicated population subgroups. Columns 12, 13 and 15: World Bank 2024a. Income share held by richest 1%: Share of pretax national in- Column 14: World Inequality Database 2023. come held by the richest 1 percent of the population. Pretax national income is the sum of all pretax personal income flows accruing to the owners of the production factors, labour and capital, before the tax/transfer system is taken into account and after the pension system is taken into account. Gini coefficient: Measure of the deviation of the distribution of income among individuals or households in a country from a perfectly equal distribution. A value of 0 represents absolute equality, a value of 100 absolute inequality. TABLE 3 / INEQUALITY-ADJUSTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX 287 TABLE 4 Gender Development Index SDG 3 SDG 4.3 SDG 4.4 SDG 8.5 Estimated gross national Gender Development Index Human Development Index Life expectancy at birth Expected years of schooling Mean years of schooling income per capitaa Value (years) (years) (years) (2021 PPP $) Value Groupb Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023c 2023c 2023c 2023c 2023 2023 Very high human development 1 Iceland 0.983 1 0.959 0.975 84.5 81.0 20.2 d 17.6 14.0 e 13.8 e 56,441 81,199 f 2 Norway 0.995 1 0.967 0.972 84.8 81.7 19.7 d 17.9 13.3 g 13.0 g 94,569 h 130,573 f 2 Switzerland 0.977 1 0.954 0.976 85.8 82.0 16.8 16.5 13.6 g 14.3 g 60,385 103,808 f 4 Denmark 0.990 1 0.953 0.963 83.9 80.0 19.3 d 18.1 d 13.2 g 12.8 g 63,412 88,753 f 5 Germany 0.975 1 0.946 0.970 83.8 79.0 17.4 17.3 14.0 g 14.6 g 52,189 76,218 f 5 Sweden 0.988 1 0.950 0.961 85.1 81.4 20.7 d 17.4 12.9 g 12.6 g 55,665 76,391 f 7 Australia 0.977 1 0.946 0.968 85.7 82.1 21.5 d 19.8 d 12.9 12.8 48,588 68,116 8 Hong Kong, China (SAR) 0.976 1 0.941 0.964 88.1 i 82.8 j 16.9 16.9 12.0 12.8 56,528 85,162 f 8 Netherlands 0.971 2 0.938 0.966 83.7 80.5 18.9 d 18.2 d 12.5 g 12.9 g 56,539 80,307 f 10 Belgium 0.979 1 0.940 0.960 84.3 79.9 20.1 d 18.0 12.7 g 12.7 g 51,965 75,533 f 11 Ireland 1.001 1 0.950 0.949 84.5 80.4 19.6 d 18.8 d 11.9 g 11.5 g 74,819 107,271 f 12 Finland 0.992 1 0.943 0.951 84.7 79.2 20.7 d 18.4 d 13.2 g 12.8 g 48,533 65,803 13 Singapore 0.994 1 0.944 0.950 86.2 81.2 16.9 16.6 11.7 12.3 96,100 h 125,389 f 13 United Kingdom 0.979 1 0.933 0.953 83.2 79.4 18.4 d 17.2 13.6 13.4 42,538 66,576 15 United Arab Emirates 0.957 2 0.908 0.949 84.2 82.0 16.1 15.3 12.8 13.1 39,172 89,116 f 16 Canada 0.991 1 0.934 0.943 84.8 80.4 16.5 15.3 13.9 13.8 45,016 64,494 17 Liechtenstein 0.964 2 0.919 0.954 85.3 81.8 14.4 16.4 12.2 k 12.6 k 130,593 h 203,518 f 17 New Zealand 0.973 2 0.925 0.950 83.8 80.4 19.7 d 18.9 d 12.9 g 12.9 g 39,338 55,285 17 United States 1.009 1 0.938 0.929 81.8 76.9 16.8 15.1 14.0 13.8 60,085 87,081 f 20 Korea (Republic of) 0.959 2 0.915 0.954 87.2 81.2 16.3 16.9 12.1 g 13.3 g 38,370 61,120 21 Slovenia 0.997 1 0.927 0.930 84.3 78.9 18.4 d 16.7 13.0 g 12.9 g 37,398 55,248 22 Austria 0.985 1 0.921 0.936 84.3 79.5 16.8 15.8 12.1 g 12.6 g 51,929 75,395 23 Japan 0.970 2 0.909 0.938 87.7 i 81.7 15.5 15.5 12.4 g 13.0 g 37,017 59,059 24 Malta 0.977 1 0.911 0.932 85.3 81.3 16.6 15.3 12.2 g 12.6 g 38,808 64,528 25 Luxembourg 0.996 1 0.919 0.922 83.8 80.6 14.5 14.2 12.8 e 12.4 e 70,537 100,195 f 26 France 0.993 1 0.916 0.923 86.1 80.4 16.6 15.6 11.6 g 11.9 g 46,383 64,286 27 Israel 0.994 1 0.915 0.921 84.6 80.2 15.5 14.4 13.6 g 13.5 g 41,075 55,089 28 Spain 0.989 1 0.910 0.920 86.3 81.0 18.5 d 17.2 10.7 g 10.8 g 37,689 54,633 29 Czechia 0.987 1 0.908 0.919 82.6 77.0 17.5 16.2 12.8 g 13.1 g 35,089 56,992 29 Italy 0.975 1 0.901 0.925 85.7 81.6 17.3 16.2 10.7 g 11.0 g 38,437 67,001 29 San Marino 0.991 1 0.910 0.918 87.1 84.2 j 14.8 g 14.4 g 11.3 11.4 57,818 71,829 32 Andorra .. .. .. .. 86.1 82.1 14.8 14.3 11.5 11.7 .. .. 32 Cyprus 0.996 1 0.911 0.915 83.7 79.6 16.9 15.5 12.6 g 12.6 g 39,336 51,361 34 Greece 0.963 2 0.889 0.923 84.3 79.3 21.0 d 20.7 d 11.2 g 11.9 g 27,068 45,015 35 Poland 1.012 1 0.910 0.899 82.4 74.9 17.6 15.8 13.4 g 13.0 g 33,206 51,802 36 Estonia 1.023 1 0.913 0.893 83.0 74.9 16.9 15.1 13.7 g 13.3 g 34,599 47,825 37 Saudi Arabia 0.931 3 0.855 0.918 81.2 77.1 17.9 16.4 11.0 g 12.0 g 20,287 69,767 38 Bahrain 0.957 2 0.870 0.909 82.0 80.7 16.6 15.4 12.1 10.6 24,461 70,143 39 Lithuania 1.022 1 0.903 0.884 80.7 71.2 17.0 15.9 13.7 g 13.5 g 35,072 49,587 40 Portugal 1.000 1 0.890 0.890 85.1 79.4 17.9 17.1 9.7 g 9.7 g 36,435 46,152 41 Croatia 0.999 1 0.888 0.889 81.7 75.4 17.3 15.4 11.9 l 12.3 l 33,291 50,066 41 Latvia 1.026 2 0.899 0.876 80.5 71.6 17.3 15.7 13.7 g 13.1 g 31,383 45,664 43 Qatar 1.036 2 0.909 0.877 83.4 81.6 15.1 12.3 12.7 10.2 54,169 125,739 f 44 Slovakia 0.999 1 0.879 0.880 81.6 75.0 15.5 14.4 13.1 g 13.1 g 29,901 44,016 45 Chile 0.967 2 0.862 0.891 83.1 79.2 17.2 16.6 11.2 g 11.4 g 21,087 35,091 46 Hungary 0.989 1 0.864 0.874 80.2 73.7 15.8 15.1 12.2 g 12.5 g 29,682 45,425 47 Argentina 0.988 1 0.853 0.863 79.9 74.8 20.8 d 17.0 11.5 g 10.9 g 19,464 32,386 48 Montenegro 0.984 1 0.855 0.868 80.3 73.7 16.2 14.9 12.2 g 13.3 g 22,325 34,173 48 Uruguay 1.017 1 0.863 0.848 81.9 74.2 18.9 d 16.1 10.8 10.3 22,306 35,387 50 Oman 0.945 3 0.822 0.870 81.9 78.5 14.1 13.0 12.3 11.7 15,311 48,793 51 Türkiye 0.938 3 0.822 0.876 79.9 74.5 19.7 d 19.9 d 8.3 g 9.7 g 21,513 47,535 52 Kuwait 1.011 1 0.849 0.840 81.8 79.3 18.2 d,g 13.9 g 8.4 g 7.1 g 29,510 73,825 53 Antigua and Barbuda 1.031 2 0.862 0.836 80.3 74.5 16.8 g 14.3 g 12.2 11.1 23,694 31,453 54 Seychelles 1.004 1 0.842 0.838 76.5 69.9 20.8 d 16.3 11.0 m 11.4 m 23,994 33,419 55 Bulgaria 1.000 1 0.844 0.844 79.2 72.2 15.7 14.9 11.6 g 11.4 g 25,852 38,916 55 Romania 0.986 1 0.837 0.849 79.6 72.4 14.6 13.5 11.3 11.8 28,345 51,116 57 Georgia 1.009 1 0.846 0.838 79.1 69.6 17.1 16.5 12.8 12.6 16,596 25,515 58 Saint Kitts and Nevis .. .. .. .. 76.0 68.6 19.7 d,n 17.0 n 11.1 o 10.6 o .. .. 59 Panama 1.014 1 0.844 0.833 82.6 76.7 14.0 g 12.7 g 11.1 g 10.5 g 29,598 39,169 Continued → 288 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 4 SDG 3 SDG 4.3 SDG 4.4 SDG 8.5 Estimated gross national Gender Development Index Human Development Index Life expectancy at birth Expected years of schooling Mean years of schooling income per capitaa Value (years) (years) (years) (2021 PPP $) Value Groupb Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023c 2023c 2023c 2023c 2023 2023 60 Brunei Darussalam 0.993 1 0.829 0.835 77.6 73.3 14.2 p 13.3 p 9.3 m 9.3 56,315 93,032 f 60 Kazakhstan 1.004 1 0.837 0.833 78.4 70.1 14.2 13.9 12.6 g 12.5 g 25,774 36,485 62 Costa Rica 0.975 1 0.818 0.840 83.4 78.1 16.9 g 15.8 g 8.9 g 8.7 g 15,436 31,586 62 Serbia 0.987 1 0.827 0.838 80.0 73.5 15.7 14.4 11.4 g 12.0 g 17,781 29,012 64 Russian Federation 1.023 1 0.840 0.821 79.0 67.3 13.2 13.1 12.5 12.3 31,728 47,866 65 Belarus 1.009 1 0.826 0.820 79.1 69.5 13.8 13.7 12.4 g 12.3 g 22,205 31,904 66 Bahamas 1.015 1 0.826 0.814 78.2 70.9 12.2 q 11.6 q 12.9 g 12.8 g 28,999 33,132 67 Malaysia 0.973 2 0.805 0.828 79.4 74.3 13.1 12.2 11.0 11.2 22,512 41,670 68 North Macedonia 0.955 2 0.794 0.831 79.6 75.1 15.3 14.3 9.6 p 10.8 p 15,663 28,957 69 Armenia 1.006 1 0.812 0.807 79.5 71.4 14.9 13.9 11.4 e 11.3 e 16,566 24,445 69 Barbados 1.035 2 0.819 0.791 78.6 73.6 18.4 d,g 14.8 g 10.4 e 9.1 e 14,577 20,313 71 Albania 0.963 2 0.794 0.824 81.4 77.7 14.7 14.3 9.9 e 10.5 e 14,123 21,211 72 Trinidad and Tobago 0.990 1 0.801 0.809 76.7 70.4 14.6 r 13.9 r 10.9 10.6 20,212 33,937 73 Mauritius 0.971 2 0.790 0.813 78.2 71.9 14.7 g 13.6 g 10.0 e 10.1 e 16,738 37,829 74 Bosnia and Herzegovina 0.967 2 0.789 0.816 80.9 74.4 13.7 12.6 10.3 11.7 14,574 25,622 High human development 75 Iran (Islamic Republic of) 0.875 5 0.724 0.828 79.6 75.8 14.1 g 13.9 g 10.9 g 10.8 g 4,433 27,375 76 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines .. .. .. .. 74.3 68.7 16.4 q 16.1 q 11.4 s 11.2 s .. .. 76 Thailand 1.008 1 0.802 0.795 80.9 72.2 15.5 g 15.2 g 8.9 9.2 18,717 22,519 78 China 0.976 1 0.786 0.806 80.9 75.2 16.0 g 15.1 g 7.8 g 8.3 g 16,257 27,580 79 Peru 0.959 2 0.777 0.810 80.1 75.4 15.0 g 14.8 g 9.6 g 10.7 g 11,653 17,053 80 Grenada 0.984 1 0.783 0.796 78.4 72.4 17.2 g 16.0 g 9.3 t 9.6 t 11,030 17,645 81 Azerbaijan 0.983 1 0.781 0.795 77.1 71.6 12.9 12.9 11.0 11.2 17,656 23,803 81 Mexico 0.976 1 0.777 0.797 77.8 72.2 15.0 13.9 9.2 g 9.5 g 15,410 28,611 83 Colombia 0.992 1 0.784 0.790 80.5 75.0 14.5 14.0 9.2 g 8.9 g 15,384 22,035 84 Brazil 1.002 1 0.785 0.783 79.0 72.8 16.5 15.1 8.6 g 8.2 g 13,886 22,268 84 Palau 0.992 1 0.781 0.788 71.8 67.2 15.1 13.1 13.3 m 13.3 m 12,385 19,156 86 Moldova (Republic of) 1.029 2 0.795 0.773 75.5 66.6 15.0 g 14.3 g 11.9 11.7 15,025 16,853 87 Ukraine 1.038 2 0.792 0.763 80.2 66.9 13.5 13.1 11.4 e 10.7 e 13,295 21,120 88 Ecuador 0.998 1 0.776 0.777 80.1 74.7 15.4 14.4 8.9 9.0 12,333 15,649 89 Dominican Republic 1.024 1 0.783 0.765 77.0 70.5 14.6 12.6 9.9 g 9.0 g 17,368 26,730 89 Guyana 0.992 1 0.771 0.777 73.9 66.5 13.3 r 12.7 r 8.8 e 8.6 e 32,865 61,804 89 Sri Lanka 0.951 2 0.750 0.789 80.6 74.2 13.6 12.6 10.7 10.8 6,970 18,637 92 Tonga 0.998 1 0.763 0.764 76.4 69.4 19.0 d,g 16.6 g 11.0 e 10.8 e 5,957 9,081 93 Maldives 0.986 1 0.755 0.766 82.8 79.7 14.1 11.6 7.4 e 7.4 e 12,134 23,702 93 Viet Nam 0.997 1 0.765 0.767 79.3 69.9 15.5 u 15.4 8.5 9.5 11,422 14,711 95 Turkmenistan .. .. .. .. 72.8 66.9 13.2 13.2 10.9 g 11.5 g .. .. 96 Algeria 0.887 5 0.702 0.791 77.7 74.9 16.2 14.8 6.9 g 7.9 g 5,284 24,554 97 Cuba 0.975 1 0.750 0.769 80.5 75.7 14.6 13.2 10.7 e 10.5 e 5,994 10,900 98 Dominica .. .. .. .. 74.5 68.2 15.0 g 13.3 g 10.0 10.2 .. .. 99 Paraguay 0.988 1 0.750 0.759 77.0 70.9 14.4 g 13.6 g 8.9 g 8.9 g 11,930 18,555 100 Egypt 0.895 5 0.695 0.777 73.8 69.5 13.0 g 13.2 g 10.7 g 9.7 g 5,077 27,143 100 Jordan 0.861 5 0.677 0.787 80.2 75.7 13.6 12.7 9.7 10.9 2,745 15,296 102 Lebanon 0.992 1 0.749 0.755 79.7 75.7 12.1 u 11.4 u 13.1 v 9.1 v 6,068 16,829 103 Saint Lucia 1.016 1 0.754 0.742 76.3 69.3 13.4 12.1 8.9 g 8.4 g 16,790 25,106 104 Mongolia 1.030 2 0.757 0.735 76.4 67.2 14.4 13.1 9.9 p 8.9 p 11,204 18,386 105 Tunisia 0.931 3 0.712 0.765 79.1 73.9 15.6 g 13.8 g 7.0 8.2 6,063 18,092 106 South Africa 0.996 1 0.738 0.741 69.6 62.6 14.4 13.2 11.5 11.7 10,794 16,755 107 Uzbekistan 0.951 2 0.718 0.755 75.4 69.5 12.5 12.4 11.8 12.1 5,840 11,759 108 Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 0.961 2 0.718 0.748 71.1 66.1 15.7 g 15.5 g 9.4 g 10.7 g 8,010 10,874 108 Gabon 0.994 1 0.728 0.733 71.1 65.9 12.6 q 12.3 q 10.5 8.9 13,264 24,269 108 Marshall Islands 0.960 2 0.716 0.746 69.3 64.9 17.0 15.8 11.5 m 11.8 m 5,186 9,161 111 Botswana 0.997 1 0.730 0.732 71.7 66.7 11.8 11.1 10.4 10.5 15,531 18,444 111 Fiji 0.948 3 0.706 0.745 69.4 65.3 14.4 13.3 10.4 10.3 7,531 18,235 113 Indonesia 0.945 3 0.704 0.745 73.3 69.0 13.6 13.1 8.4 g 9.0 g 9,073 18,284 114 Suriname 0.993 1 0.717 0.722 76.8 70.5 11.3 10.6 8.6 g 8.2 g 12,734 21,958 115 Belize 0.981 1 0.713 0.727 76.5 70.9 12.3 11.6 8.8 8.8 9,453 15,179 115 Libya 0.955 2 0.700 0.733 70.4 68.3 13.0 t 12.8 t 8.4 o 7.2 o 12,125 27,282 117 Jamaica 1.013 1 0.723 0.713 74.0 69.0 13.5 g 11.3 g 10.2 9.6 8,153 12,002 117 Kyrgyzstan 0.959 2 0.701 0.731 75.2 68.2 12.8 12.6 12.0 g 12.2 g 4,120 8,080 Continued → TABLE 4 / GENDER DEVELOPMENT INDEX 289 TABLE 4 SDG 3 SDG 4.3 SDG 4.4 SDG 8.5 Estimated gross national Gender Development Index Human Development Index Life expectancy at birth Expected years of schooling Mean years of schooling income per capitaa Value (years) (years) (years) (2021 PPP $) Value Groupb Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023c 2023c 2023c 2023c 2023 2023 117 Philippines 0.984 1 0.709 0.721 72.8 66.9 13.1 12.1 10.2 9.8 7,744 13,732 120 Morocco 0.859 5 0.642 0.748 77.6 73.2 15.1 15.1 5.3 7.1 3,221 13,990 121 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 0.993 1 0.699 0.704 76.5 68.7 13.0 s 11.6 s 10.0 m 9.7 s 5,040 9,323 122 Samoa 0.955 2 0.687 0.719 73.7 69.9 13.0 11.9 11.8 g 10.9 g 3,724 8,150 123 Nicaragua 0.952 2 0.685 0.719 77.4 72.3 11.7 11.3 9.9 10.0 4,676 9,161 124 Nauru 0.955 2 0.689 0.722 64.0 60.3 13.1 t 12.6 u 9.3 t 10.2 t 15,192 23,930 Medium human development 125 Bhutan 0.958 2 0.681 0.711 75.0 71.3 13.7 g 12.6 g 5.2 o 6.3 o 10,750 16,531 126 Eswatini (Kingdom of) 0.964 2 0.682 0.708 67.0 61.2 14.7 g 15.8 g 8.5 8.9 8,446 11,447 126 Iraq 0.793 5 0.592 0.747 74.1 70.4 11.8 w 12.9 w 5.6 r 8.0 r 2,909 22,332 128 Tajikistan 0.926 3 0.662 0.715 74.0 69.6 10.5 g 11.2 g 10.9 e 11.6 e 4,051 7,504 129 Tuvalu 0.969 2 0.675 0.697 70.7 63.8 12.6 t 12.1 t 10.6 g 10.9 g 4,963 8,957 130 Bangladesh 0.918 4 0.650 0.708 76.4 73.0 12.4 11.9 6.2 7.3 5,280 11,820 130 India 0.874 5 0.631 0.722 73.6 70.5 13.0 12.9 5.8 8.0 4,543 13,273 132 El Salvador 0.983 1 0.670 0.682 76.3 67.5 11.5 10.7 7.0 7.6 7,699 13,795 133 Equatorial Guinea .. .. .. .. 65.7 62.0 12.1 u 12.9 t .. .. .. .. 133 Palestine, State of 0.945 3 0.638 0.676 71.5 59.7 13.8 12.2 10.2 10.0 2,339 10,806 135 Cabo Verde 0.964 2 0.653 0.677 79.2 72.9 11.6 g 11.1 g 5.8 o 6.3 o 5,998 10,259 136 Namibia 1.011 1 0.668 0.661 71.3 63.3 11.8 x 11.8 x 7.5 e 7.0 e 9,353 12,555 137 Guatemala 0.934 3 0.638 0.683 74.9 70.3 10.8 10.5 5.3 6.5 8,528 16,454 138 Congo 0.924 4 0.622 0.673 67.5 64.1 13.4 g 12.1 g 7.3 e 9.4 e 4,214 7,591 139 Honduras 0.964 2 0.633 0.657 75.5 70.3 10.6 g 9.7 g 7.0 g 8.1 g 4,914 7,199 140 Kiribati 0.976 1 0.634 0.650 68.2 64.6 12.4 y 11.3 y 9.3 o 9.0 o 3,949 6,009 141 Sao Tome and Principe 0.980 1 0.633 0.646 73.7 66.2 13.2 r 12.7 r 5.4 g 6.8 g 4,982 6,192 142 Timor-Leste 0.939 3 0.613 0.653 69.4 66.1 13.5 x 13.0 x 5.8 x 6.8 x 4,188 6,661 143 Ghana 0.933 3 0.607 0.651 67.9 63.1 11.3 11.5 6.1 8.3 5,958 7,736 143 Kenya 0.944 3 0.610 0.646 65.9 61.5 11.5 x 11.5 x 8.0 9.3 4,641 6,586 145 Nepal 0.858 5 0.567 0.661 71.8 68.8 12.4 14.0 3.5 5.8 3,185 6,390 146 Vanuatu 0.952 2 0.604 0.635 73.9 69.4 11.9 g 11.7 g 6.6 o 7.5 o 2,857 3,940 147 Lao People's Democratic Republic 0.911 4 0.583 0.640 71.3 66.8 8.8 9.7 5.1 e 7.0 e 6,691 9,507 148 Angola 0.906 4 0.584 0.645 67.1 62.1 11.5 12.9 4.5 x 7.3 x 5,854 7,425 149 Micronesia (Federated States of) 0.953 2 0.598 0.628 71.1 63.5 11.5 t 11.6 u 6.9 o 7.8 o 3,157 5,348 150 Myanmar 0.947 3 0.589 0.622 70.2 63.8 12.0 v 11.1 v 6.1 z 6.7 z 3,122 6,731 151 Cambodia 0.939 3 0.586 0.625 73.2 68.0 11.4 10.9 4.4 6.2 4,067 5,832 152 Comoros 0.929 3 0.581 0.625 68.9 64.8 13.7 g 12.9 g 5.2 6.9 2,657 4,295 153 Zimbabwe 0.944 3 0.581 0.616 65.0 60.2 10.7 g 11.4 g 8.3 g 9.7 g 3,145 3,915 154 Zambia 0.949 3 0.580 0.611 68.7 63.9 11.2 aa 10.9 aa 6.6 e 8.4 e 3,132 3,768 155 Cameroon 0.898 5 0.556 0.619 65.9 61.5 10.2 11.4 5.7 e 7.6 e 3,629 5,870 156 Solomon Islands 0.927 3 0.565 0.610 72.0 69.2 11.0 t 11.6 u 5.5 o 6.8 o 2,469 3,072 157 Côte d'Ivoire 0.910 4 0.553 0.607 64.1 60.0 11.1 11.7 4.0 5.6 5,161 8,253 157 Uganda 0.908 4 0.556 0.612 71.1 65.3 11.2 x 12.0 x 5.2 g 7.9 g 2,280 3,201 159 Rwanda 0.922 4 0.552 0.599 69.9 65.5 12.5 12.6 4.5 5.3 2,159 3,824 160 Papua New Guinea 0.926 3 0.554 0.599 69.1 63.7 10.9 x 12.1 x 4.3 e 5.7 e 3,436 4,475 161 Togo 0.865 5 0.535 0.618 62.9 62.5 12.9 g 14.5 g 4.5 g 7.4 g 2,470 3,237 162 Syrian Arab Republic 0.787 5 0.477 0.607 74.4 69.8 7.2 q 7.7 q 5.1 m 6.7 m 1,149 6,688 163 Mauritania 0.886 5 0.528 0.595 70.5 66.5 8.1 g 7.8 g 4.2 e 5.9 e 3,604 9,038 164 Nigeria 0.892 5 0.528 0.592 54.7 54.2 10.2 10.8 6.6 8.7 5,001 6,126 165 Tanzania (United Republic of) 0.951 2 0.542 0.569 69.8 64.2 8.7 8.5 5.5 6.7 2,977 4,062 166 Haiti 0.932 3 0.534 0.573 68.3 61.7 10.8 t 11.0 t 4.8 ab 6.1 ab 2,256 3,627 167 Lesotho 1.006 1 0.550 0.547 60.0 54.6 11.3 g 10.7 g 8.4 g 7.0 g 2,495 3,592 Low human development 168 Pakistan 0.838 5 0.485 0.579 70.2 65.3 7.3 8.6 4.0 g 4.6 g 2,173 8,724 169 Senegal 0.924 4 0.509 0.550 70.8 66.8 9.9 8.4 2.5 g 3.8 g 2,665 5,686 170 Gambia 0.959 2 0.515 0.537 67.5 64.2 9.9 x 8.1 x 3.9 x 5.8 x 2,561 3,065 171 Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 0.886 5 0.491 0.554 64.0 59.8 10.4 g 11.5 g 6.1 e 9.0 e 1,215 1,650 172 Malawi 0.925 3 0.497 0.537 70.6 64.1 10.0 9.8 4.3 p 6.4 p 1,356 1,925 173 Benin 0.866 5 0.479 0.553 62.2 59.3 9.8 11.1 2.0 4.6 3,329 4,279 174 Guinea-Bissau 0.878 5 0.485 0.553 66.4 61.7 10.5 w 11.7 w 2.5 5.1 1,996 2,820 175 Djibouti 0.814 5 0.453 0.556 68.5 63.5 5.8 g 6.6 g 2.7 s 5.1 s 3,101 9,690 176 Sudan 0.813 5 0.441 0.542 69.6 63.3 8.4 g 8.8 g 3.6 4.3 909 4,742 Continued → 290 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 4 SDG 3 SDG 4.3 SDG 4.4 SDG 8.5 Estimated gross national Gender Development Index Human Development Index Life expectancy at birth Expected years of schooling Mean years of schooling income per capitaa Value (years) (years) (years) (2021 PPP $) Value Groupb Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male Female Male HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023c 2023c 2023c 2023c 2023 2023 177 Liberia 0.865 5 0.473 0.547 63.4 60.9 10.1 10.8 4.7 g 7.8 g 1,279 1,798 178 Eritrea .. .. .. .. 70.7 66.5 6.9 g 7.8 g 4.0 o 5.7 o .. .. 179 Guinea 0.828 5 0.451 0.545 61.9 59.5 9.4 g 11.4 g 1.5 g 3.6 g 2,550 4,460 180 Ethiopia 0.886 5 0.465 0.525 70.7 64.1 8.6 x 9.7 x 1.7 g 3.2 g 2,056 3,531 181 Afghanistan 0.660 5 0.379 0.575 67.5 64.5 8.1 g 13.4 g 1.2 3.9 721 3,198 182 Mozambique 0.920 4 0.473 0.514 66.5 60.3 10.5 g 11.2 g 3.7 5.7 1,198 1,523 183 Madagascar 0.934 3 0.469 0.502 65.4 61.9 9.2 g 8.9 g 4.3 4.9 1,345 1,965 184 Yemen 0.407 5 0.221 0.543 71.4 67.2 6.5 s 8.1 s 3.6 7.5 137 1,877 185 Sierra Leone 0.830 5 0.423 0.510 63.5 60.1 7.8 u 10.3 u 2.5 g 4.8 g 1,437 1,992 186 Burkina Faso 0.881 5 0.428 0.486 63.2 58.9 8.8 8.7 1.6 3.1 1,634 3,153 187 Burundi 0.932 3 0.424 0.456 65.7 61.6 10.1 g 9.6 g 2.8 g 4.3 g 764 955 188 Mali 0.812 5 0.372 0.459 61.9 59.0 6.3 g 7.7 g 1.1 p 2.2 p 1,409 3,257 188 Niger 0.855 5 0.385 0.451 62.1 60.3 7.5 g 9.1 g 1.0 e 1.8 e 1,276 1,895 190 Chad 0.787 5 0.365 0.464 57.0 53.2 7.0 g 9.6 g 1.3 g 3.5 g 1,248 2,245 191 Central African Republic .. .. .. .. 59.3 55.3 6.2 g 8.6 g 2.7 e 5.4 e .. .. 192 Somalia 0.793 5 0.354 0.447 61.4 56.4 7.5 t 8.1 t 0.9 2.9 790 2,156 193 South Sudan .. .. .. .. 60.6 54.6 4.5 g 6.7 g 4.8 ac 6.2 ac .. .. Other countries or territories Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of) .. .. .. .. 75.7 71.5 11.9 g 12.5 g .. .. .. .. Monaco .. .. .. .. 88.5 i 84.4 j 22.3 d 21.1 d .. .. .. .. Human development groups Very high human development 0.989 — 0.908 0.918 82.9 77.2 16.9 15.9 12.4 12.6 41,543 64,643 High human development 0.971 — 0.764 0.786 78.6 72.9 15.0 14.2 8.6 8.8 13,044 23,717 Medium human development 0.883 — 0.610 0.691 71.0 67.7 12.0 12.2 5.9 7.8 4,456 11,072 Low human development 0.836 — 0.463 0.554 67.4 62.7 8.4 9.5 3.3 4.8 1,618 4,475 Developing countries 0.934 — 0.685 0.733 74.4 69.8 12.6 12.6 7.3 8.3 8,845 17,725 Regions Arab States 0.871 — 0.655 0.752 74.5 70.6 11.9 12.0 7.5 8.6 5,493 25,449 East Asia and the Pacific 0.973 — 0.763 0.785 78.9 73.1 14.9 14.2 8.0 8.5 14,435 24,478 Europe and Central Asia 0.970 — 0.803 0.829 78.4 71.2 15.6 15.5 10.5 10.9 16,367 30,624 Latin America and the Caribbean 0.989 — 0.777 0.785 78.5 72.7 15.3 14.1 9.2 9.1 13,703 22,526 South Asia 0.872 — 0.618 0.709 73.6 70.2 12.0 12.3 5.9 7.7 4,246 12,996 Sub-Saharan Africa 0.916 — 0.544 0.594 64.6 60.4 10.1 10.7 5.4 7.1 3,623 5,173 Least developed countries 0.889 — 0.525 0.591 68.9 64.2 9.8 10.5 4.3 5.9 2,549 4,832 Small island developing states 0.979 — 0.731 0.747 74.7 69.2 12.8 12.4 8.5 8.8 15,508 23,151 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 0.986 — 0.908 0.921 83.1 78.0 17.0 16.0 12.2 12.5 41,745 63,915 World 0.955 — 0.737 0.772 75.9 71.0 13.1 13.0 8.4 9.2 14,943 25,751 TABLE 4 / GENDER DEVELOPMENT INDEX 291 TABLE 4 u HDRO estimate based on data from ICF Macro Demo- Notes graphic and Health Surveys, the UNESCO Institute for Definitions Statistics and UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. a Because disaggregated income data are not available, Gender Development Index: Ratio of female to male HDI val- data are crudely estimated. See Definitions and Technical v Refers to 2018 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics ues. See Technical note 3 at https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/ note 3 at https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2025_ (2024). files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_technical_notes.pdf for details on HDR/hdr2025_technical_notes.pdf for details on how how the Gender Development Index is calculated. w Updated by HDRO based on data from UNICEF Multiple the Gender Development Index is calculated. Indicator Cluster Surveys for various years. Gender Development Index groups: Countries are divided into b Countries are divided into five groups by absolute five groups by absolute deviation from gender parity in HDI x Updated by HDRO based on data from ICF Macro deviation from gender parity in HDI values. values. Group 1 comprises countries with high equality in HDI Demographic and Health Surveys for various years and achievements between women and men (absolute deviation of c Data refer to 2023 or the most recent year available. UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). less than 2.5 percent), group 2 comprises countries with me- d In calculating the HDI value, expected years of schooling y Updated by HDRO based on data from UNICEF Multiple dium to high equality in HDI achievements between women and is capped at 18 years. Indicator Cluster Surveys for various years and estimates men (absolute deviation of 2.5–5 percent), group 3 comprises using cross-country regression. countries with medium equality in HDI achievements between e Updated by HDRO based on data from Barro and Lee women and men (absolute deviation of 5–7.5 percent), group (2018) and UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). z Refers to 2019 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics 4 comprises countries with medium to low equality in HDI (2024). f In calculating the male HDI value, estimated gross achievements between women and men (absolute deviation national income per capita is capped at $75,000. aa Updated by HDRO based on data from ICF Macro of 7.5–10 percent) and group 5 comprises countries with low Demographic and Health Surveys for various years. equality in HDI achievements between women and men (abso- g Updated by HDRO based on data from UNESCO lute deviation from gender parity of more than 10 percent). Institute for Statistics (2024). ab Refers to 2017 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). Human Development Index (HDI): A composite index measur- h In calculating the female HDI value, estimated gross ing average achievement in three basic dimensions of human national income per capita is capped at $75,000. ac Refers to 2008 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics development—a long and healthy life, knowledge and a decent (2024). i In calculating the female HDI value, life expectancy at standard of living. See Technical note 1 at https://hdr.undp.org/ birth is capped at 87.5 years. sites/default/files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_technical_notes.pdf for details on how the HDI is calculated. j In calculating the male HDI value, life expectancy at birth is capped at 82.5 years. Life expectancy at birth: Number of years a newborn infant could expect to live if prevailing patterns of age-specific mortality k Updated by HDRO using the mean years of schooling rates at the time of birth stay the same throughout the infant’s life. trend of Austria and data from UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). Expected years of schooling: Number of years of schooling that a child of school entrance age can expect to receive if l Updated by HDRO based on data from Eurostat (2024) prevailing patterns of age-specific enrolment rates persist and UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). throughout the child’s life. m HDRO estimate based on data from Robert Barro and Mean years of schooling: Average number of years of Jong-Wha Lee, Eurostat’s EU Statistics on Income and education received by people ages 25 and older, converted Living Conditions, ICF Macro Demographic and Health from educational attainment levels using official durations of Surveys, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and each level. Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Institute for Statistics and United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) Multiple Estimated gross national income per capita: Derived from Indicator Cluster Surveys. the ratio of female to male wages, female and male shares of economically active population and gross national income (in n Refers to 2015 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2021 purchasing power parity terms). See Technical note 3 at (2024). https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_ o HDRO estimate based on data from Robert Barro and technical_notes.pdf for details. Jong-Wha Lee, ICF Macro Demographic and Health Surveys, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the UNESCO Institute for Statistics and UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. Main data sources p Refers to 2020 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). Column 1: Calculated based on data in columns 3 and 4. q HDRO estimate based on data from the Center for Column 2: Calculated based on data in column 1. Distributive, Labor and Social Studies and the World Columns 3 and 4: HDRO calculations based on data from Bank’s Socio-Economic Database for Latin America and Barro and Lee (2018), IMF (2024), UNDESA (2024a), UNESCO the Caribbean, ICF Macro Demographic and Health Institute for Statistics (2024), United Nations Statistics Division Surveys, the UNESCO Institute for Statistics and UNICEF (2025) and World Bank (2024a). Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. Columns 5 and 6: UNDESA 2024a. r Updated by HDRO based on data from UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024) and UNICEF Multiple Columns 7 and 8: ICF Macro Demographic and Health Surveys, Indicator Cluster Surveys for various years. UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2024 and UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. s Updated by HDRO based on data from UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024) and estimates using cross- Columns 9 and 10: Barro and Lee 2018, Eurostat 2024, ICF country regression. Macro Demographic and Health Surveys, UNESCO Institute for Statistics 2024 and UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. t Based on HDRO estimates using cross-country regression. Columns 11 and 12: HDRO calculations based on ILO (2024), IMF (2024), UNDESA (2024a), United Nations Statistics Division (2025) and World Bank (2024a). 292 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 5 Gender Inequality Index SDG 3.1 SDG 3.7 SDG 5.5 SDG 4.4 Maternal Adolescent Share of seats Population with at least some Gender Inequality Index mortality ratio birth rate in parliament secondary education Labour force participation ratea (deaths per (births per 1,000 (% held (% ages 25 and older) (% ages 15 and older) Value Rank 100,000 live births) women ages 15–19) by women) Female Male Female Male HDI RANK 2023 2023 2020 2023 2023 2023b 2023b 2023 2023 Very high human development 1 Iceland 0.024 7 3 3.4 47.6 99.9 99.6 70.5 79.3 2 Norway 0.004 2 2 1.4 46.2 95.9 98.5 62.1 69.2 2 Switzerland 0.010 4 7 1.5 37.8 98.0 98.3 62.6 72.9 4 Denmark 0.003 1 5 1.1 43.6 91.0 92.5 59.7 67.7 5 Germany 0.057 21 4 5.5 35.3 93.6 94.3 56.4 66.7 5 Sweden 0.007 3 5 1.8 46.4 94.9 94.1 64.4 70.6 7 Australia 0.056 20 3 6.7 44.5 92.3 93.5 62.8 71.7 8 Hong Kong, China (SAR) .. .. .. 1.1 .. 77.9 84.1 52.2 63.6 8 Netherlands 0.013 5 4 1.9 39.1 91.1 92.7 64.1 73.1 10 Belgium 0.031 8 5 3.7 43.5 88.3 91.0 50.7 59.5 11 Ireland 0.054 19 5 4.1 27.4 90.4 89.9 60.4 70.8 12 Finland 0.021 6 8 3.1 46.0 91.6 91.6 58.5 63.8 13 Singapore 0.031 8 7 2.2 29.1 82.9 87.8 62.6 74.9 13 United Kingdom 0.083 31 10 8.4 31.5 99.1 99.0 58.1 66.6 15 United Arab Emirates 0.040 13 9 3.1 50.0 83.4 87.0 54.5 90.8 16 Canada 0.052 18 11 4.8 35.8 96.1 96.5 61.6 69.7 17 Liechtenstein .. .. .. 1.7 28.0 .. .. 52.8 67.2 17 New Zealand 0.082 30 7 10.9 44.3 82.9 c 82.3 c 67.6 76.7 17 United States 0.169 45 21 13.1 28.2 97.9 97.8 57.3 68.1 20 Korea (Republic of) 0.038 12 8 0.5 19.1 85.0 94.2 56.1 73.4 21 Slovenia 0.042 14 5 3.5 31.5 98.3 98.9 53.8 63.2 22 Austria 0.033 10 5 3.8 42.8 98.8 98.7 56.8 66.6 23 Japan 0.059 22 4 1.7 15.7 98.2 d 99.1 d 54.8 71.4 24 Malta 0.111 36 3 10.4 27.8 85.0 90.4 57.2 73.2 25 Luxembourg 0.044 17 6 4.0 33.3 90.1 91.3 58.2 66.2 26 France 0.034 11 8 3.5 37.2 90.5 92.8 52.8 60.1 27 Israel 0.080 27 3 6.2 24.2 90.7 92.7 61.4 68.9 28 Spain 0.043 15 3 4.8 43.7 81.5 85.0 53.4 63.0 29 Czechia 0.088 32 3 6.0 23.8 99.0 99.4 51.8 68.5 29 Italy 0.043 15 5 2.9 33.6 79.8 86.2 41.5 58.8 29 San Marino .. .. .. 1.2 33.3 87.2 88.3 70.4 70.6 32 Andorra .. .. .. 3.5 50.0 81.7 84.6 .. .. 32 Cyprus 0.252 64 68 7.0 14.3 84.1 87.8 60.9 70.3 34 Greece 0.103 34 8 7.0 23.0 73.8 80.4 44.8 60.0 35 Poland 0.081 29 2 6.2 27.5 87.5 c 91.4 c 52.0 66.3 36 Estonia 0.061 23 5 5.0 28.7 98.7 98.7 62.0 71.6 37 Saudi Arabia 0.228 61 16 11.1 19.9 75.7 81.5 34.6 83.6 38 Bahrain 0.165 44 16 7.5 22.5 88.6 79.9 41.5 85.1 39 Lithuania 0.070 24 9 5.9 28.4 96.9 98.1 58.5 68.5 40 Portugal 0.076 26 12 7.0 36.1 64.1 65.4 55.6 63.9 41 Croatia 0.074 25 5 6.6 31.8 93.5 97.5 47.3 57.6 41 Latvia 0.117 38 18 7.6 32.0 97.2 98.8 55.7 67.9 43 Qatar 0.195 52 8 5.7 4.4 86.7 70.2 61.7 95.3 44 Slovakia 0.176 48 5 24.6 22.0 99.1 99.2 56.3 67.3 45 Chile 0.102 33 15 6.5 32.7 86.0 88.5 52.0 71.4 46 Hungary 0.213 54 15 17.5 14.1 98.3 99.1 54.5 68.4 47 Argentina 0.264 70 45 26.4 43.8 74.3 e 72.2 e 53.2 72.2 48 Montenegro 0.121 40 6 9.4 21.0 90.1 96.2 52.2 66.1 48 Uruguay 0.218 56 19 26.2 26.9 63.2 59.3 56.5 73.4 50 Oman 0.222 57 17 6.0 10.2 93.3 98.7 39.9 86.5 51 Türkiye 0.227 59 17 12.1 19.8 62.0 c 80.4 c 35.8 71.2 52 Kuwait 0.188 51 7 1.6 3.1 62.7 c 57.8 c 47.3 85.9 53 Antigua and Barbuda 0.240 63 21 32.9 22.9 88.0 76.6 69.6 76.0 54 Seychelles .. .. 3 54.5 22.9 .. .. 61.3 65.5 55 Bulgaria 0.208 53 7 39.1 24.2 95.7 97.1 49.8 62.2 55 Romania 0.227 59 10 33.8 18.9 91.0 95.0 41.9 61.9 57 Georgia 0.257 66 28 21.1 18.4 98.2 98.7 53.7 69.6 58 Saint Kitts and Nevis .. .. .. 35.2 31.3 .. .. .. .. 59 Panama 0.374 94 50 57.3 22.9 67.7 65.3 50.4 74.3 Continued → TABLE 5 / GENDER INEQUALITY INDEX 293 TABLE 5 SDG 3.1 SDG 3.7 SDG 5.5 SDG 4.4 Maternal Adolescent Share of seats Population with at least some Gender Inequality Index mortality ratio birth rate in parliament secondary education Labour force participation ratea (deaths per (births per 1,000 (% held (% ages 25 and older) (% ages 15 and older) Value Rank 100,000 live births) women ages 15–19) by women) Female Male Female Male HDI RANK 2023 2023 2020 2023 2023 2023b 2023b 2023 2023 60 Brunei Darussalam 0.257 66 44 8.5 11.8 86.0 88.8 54.4 72.3 60 Kazakhstan 0.182 50 13 18.2 19.6 100.0 c 100.0 c 63.3 74.6 62 Costa Rica 0.217 55 22 26.3 47.4 52.1 52.9 43.9 69.7 62 Serbia 0.117 38 10 13.7 34.8 91.2 c 96.8 c 51.5 65.5 64 Russian Federation 0.169 45 14 13.0 17.8 99.3 99.1 56.2 70.5 65 Belarus 0.080 27 1 8.6 34.7 99.3 c 99.9 c 65.3 74.9 66 Bahamas 0.325 81 77 24.6 20.0 96.2 97.7 98.7 96.8 67 Malaysia 0.172 47 21 6.0 14.7 79.0 82.1 55.8 81.9 68 North Macedonia 0.112 37 3 13.0 42.5 68.3 76.2 42.5 61.5 69 Armenia 0.180 49 27 13.4 35.5 99.1 99.3 61.6 76.8 69 Barbados 0.297 76 39 45.3 32.7 95.9 e 86.4 e 54.9 62.7 71 Albania 0.107 35 8 12.8 35.7 90.5 93.9 57.8 70.9 72 Trinidad and Tobago 0.262 69 27 36.0 33.8 73.0 70.7 46.7 64.2 73 Mauritius 0.352 87 84 19.8 20.0 60.4 71.3 46.9 69.7 74 Bosnia and Herzegovina 0.157 43 6 11.2 17.5 86.2 96.2 42.2 62.1 High human development 75 Iran (Islamic Republic of) 0.482 123 22 26.2 5.6 59.1 69.5 13.6 67.5 76 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines .. .. 62 42.3 18.2 46.3 f 41.5 f .. .. 76 Thailand 0.288 73 29 26.1 16.0 51.9 56.7 60.6 76.6 78 China 0.132 41 23 5.2 26.5 68.3 c 77.9 c 54.6 75.6 79 Peru 0.340 83 69 43.6 38.8 65.9 73.9 65.1 80.5 80 Grenada 0.226 58 21 29.1 31.0 55.4 d 50.8 d 49.1 63.3 81 Azerbaijan 0.315 80 41 34.8 18.6 98.0 98.4 61.9 69.6 81 Mexico 0.358 88 59 60.1 50.1 65.3 67.0 46.2 76.4 83 Colombia 0.393 98 75 59.5 29.4 62.2 59.8 52.0 76.5 84 Brazil 0.390 96 72 42.7 17.7 70.0 67.6 53.1 73.1 84 Palau .. .. .. 29.9 6.9 96.2 c 92.9 c 60.5 73.7 86 Moldova (Republic of) 0.146 42 12 23.0 38.6 98.0 98.7 70.1 71.7 87 Ukraine .. .. 17 11.4 20.4 .. .. 47.4 62.3 88 Ecuador 0.358 88 66 55.5 43.1 54.2 54.3 52.9 77.3 89 Dominican Republic 0.417 106 107 52.8 25.7 62.3 58.7 52.8 76.9 89 Guyana 0.427 109 112 69.9 36.6 59.4 e 57.7 e 39.7 61.8 89 Sri Lanka 0.367 93 29 15.1 5.3 81.1 83.1 32.0 70.5 92 Tonga 0.444 115 126 24.8 7.1 94.2 94.1 53.3 71.4 93 Maldives 0.309 79 57 5.4 4.6 48.6 e 47.7 e 55.4 78.8 93 Viet Nam 0.299 78 46 34.3 30.3 61.5 70.0 67.9 76.7 95 Turkmenistan .. .. 5 21.2 25.6 98.1 c 98.3 c .. .. 96 Algeria 0.443 114 78 8.7 6.8 47.0 c 51.3 c 17.6 65.5 97 Cuba 0.296 75 39 48.7 55.7 78.5 c 81.6 c 57.3 84.7 98 Dominica .. .. .. 34.1 37.5 57.9 64.9 .. .. 99 Paraguay 0.412 104 71 70.3 23.2 57.5 56.9 59.2 82.8 100 Egypt 0.398 101 17 41.8 22.9 62.5 e 70.2 e 15.0 69.2 100 Jordan 0.433 111 41 18.4 13.3 73.8 85.8 13.8 60.5 102 Lebanon 0.360 91 21 20.8 6.3 64.1 g 65.9 g 30.5 70.3 103 Saint Lucia 0.327 82 73 27.8 24.1 50.2 c 44.2 c 62.7 75.8 104 Mongolia 0.284 72 39 19.7 17.1 94.2 92.7 52.8 68.9 105 Tunisia 0.238 62 37 4.3 16.2 38.9 45.5 26.7 64.9 106 South Africa 0.388 95 127 51.6 45.7 h 77.0 78.7 49.0 61.4 107 Uzbekistan 0.291 74 30 34.1 30.0 100.0 100.0 43.6 72.0 108 Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 0.419 107 161 64.8 48.2 57.4 67.8 72.6 84.5 108 Gabon 0.505 135 227 91.7 23.8 71.6 56.9 39.7 57.4 108 Marshall Islands .. .. .. 71.8 12.1 96.3 c 97.1 c 42.7 60.8 111 Botswana 0.490 127 186 53.8 11.1 71.4 72.6 63.1 73.1 111 Fiji 0.350 85 38 21.2 10.9 87.9 i 86.7 i 38.4 75.8 113 Indonesia 0.423 108 173 26.4 21.6 53.5 59.9 53.4 82.2 114 Suriname 0.391 97 96 48.0 29.4 45.5 j 42.3 j 47.8 66.8 115 Belize 0.428 110 130 55.2 23.9 57.5 c 52.0 c 65.4 84.9 115 Libya 0.253 65 72 5.9 16.5 62.2 k 45.3 k 33.2 60.3 117 Jamaica 0.358 88 99 36.5 31.0 79.8 74.3 60.6 72.4 117 Kyrgyzstan 0.340 83 50 28.3 20.0 91.2 c 93.6 c 45.9 74.7 117 Philippines 0.351 86 78 31.9 27.5 63.6 60.0 50.2 72.5 Continued → 294 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 5 SDG 3.1 SDG 3.7 SDG 5.5 SDG 4.4 Maternal Adolescent Share of seats Population with at least some Gender Inequality Index mortality ratio birth rate in parliament secondary education Labour force participation ratea (deaths per (births per 1,000 (% held (% ages 25 and older) (% ages 15 and older) Value Rank 100,000 live births) women ages 15–19) by women) Female Male Female Male HDI RANK 2023 2023 2020 2023 2023 2023b 2023b 2023 2023 120 Morocco 0.438 113 72 25.1 21.4 33.0 38.8 19.8 69.6 121 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 0.512 137 259 73.3 22.2 l 77.0 e 72.4 e 47.2 71.8 122 Samoa 0.416 105 59 43.5 13.0 94.4 90.0 31.4 56.6 123 Nicaragua 0.408 103 78 93.5 51.6 60.5 63.1 51.2 82.3 124 Nauru .. .. .. 76.2 10.5 .. .. 56.9 72.7 Medium human development 125 Bhutan 0.278 71 60 9.4 15.5 26.7 k 34.3 k 56.8 72.4 126 Eswatini (Kingdom of) 0.484 124 240 68.7 25.0 45.8 53.0 47.1 52.3 126 Iraq 0.558 148 76 58.0 29.1 24.5 39.8 10.7 67.2 128 Tajikistan 0.258 68 17 40.4 26.6 93.7 m 93.6 e 34.4 52.7 129 Tuvalu .. .. .. 27.5 6.3 61.1 c 60.6 c 35.2 52.4 130 Bangladesh 0.487 125 123 73.2 20.9 43.2 48.0 43.4 80.8 130 India 0.403 102 103 14.1 14.8 43.5 61.1 35.1 76.4 132 El Salvador 0.362 92 43 54.2 27.4 46.4 52.8 48.8 78.1 133 Equatorial Guinea .. .. 212 150.4 27.0 .. .. .. .. 133 Palestine, State of .. .. 20 36.0 .. 70.6 68.3 18.6 70.7 135 Cabo Verde 0.298 77 42 38.8 41.7 30.2 f 34.8 f 44.9 61.9 136 Namibia 0.448 116 215 66.0 35.6 73.3 c 70.7 c 55.3 60.7 137 Guatemala 0.480 121 96 68.3 20.0 29.9 35.9 39.7 82.2 138 Congo 0.565 151 282 109.9 20.2 32.5 e 50.6 e 44.6 65.0 139 Honduras 0.437 112 72 82.1 27.3 30.0 28.6 40.3 75.4 140 Kiribati .. .. 76 44.0 6.7 .. .. 43.0 54.8 141 Sao Tome and Principe 0.492 130 146 86.2 14.5 42.6 n 52.5 n 25.7 25.9 142 Timor-Leste 0.394 99 204 27.4 36.9 35.3 40.9 40.9 52.5 143 Ghana 0.514 138 263 58.2 14.5 45.6 65.1 62.1 65.5 143 Kenya 0.526 143 530 56.3 24.6 60.5 70.1 62.8 72.4 145 Nepal 0.487 125 174 67.2 33.2 26.6 43.2 33.1 56.1 146 Vanuatu 0.556 147 94 66.2 1.9 46.6 c 48.2 c 43.1 48.8 147 Lao People's Democratic Republic 0.475 117 126 81.7 22.0 19.3 e 31.0 e 61.5 70.8 148 Angola 0.515 139 222 140.8 39.1 29.0 52.3 75.6 78.7 149 Micronesia (Federated States of) .. .. 74 43.7 14.3 .. .. 48.6 68.1 150 Myanmar 0.478 118 179 33.5 15.0 l 38.5 g 47.8 g 43.6 76.7 151 Cambodia 0.506 136 218 46.9 14.4 16.4 29.0 70.5 83.8 152 Comoros 0.501 132 217 55.2 16.7 27.3 36.3 49.3 64.5 153 Zimbabwe 0.519 140 357 98.1 34.0 88.8 92.9 62.1 74.4 154 Zambia 0.524 141 135 115.9 15.0 35.5 e 52.9 e 56.4 67.8 155 Cameroon 0.558 148 438 106.7 32.9 25.0 e 39.4 e 56.3 74.0 156 Solomon Islands 0.478 118 122 50.4 8.0 38.2 o 47.8 o 87.1 87.7 157 Côte d'Ivoire 0.589 159 480 92.1 16.8 20.0 32.7 59.6 75.5 157 Uganda 0.524 141 284 107.0 33.8 24.6 c 40.4 c 74.5 85.8 159 Rwanda 0.394 99 259 30.8 54.7 20.5 24.5 58.1 69.9 160 Papua New Guinea 0.584 156 192 54.1 2.7 27.4 41.3 50.7 53.3 161 Togo 0.564 150 399 77.1 19.8 14.3 c 33.3 c 69.1 72.7 162 Syrian Arab Republic 0.490 127 30 38.9 10.8 24.1 k 32.0 k 14.7 69.8 163 Mauritania 0.603 161 464 88.9 23.3 16.7 e 27.9 e 31.6 66.6 164 Nigeria 0.677 171 1,047 86.4 3.6 42.4 57.8 80.7 84.5 165 Tanzania (United Republic of) 0.504 134 238 113.2 37.4 12.6 18.3 74.9 84.0 166 Haiti 0.618 165 350 49.8 2.7 p 27.0 i 36.0 i 50.1 65.6 167 Lesotho 0.534 144 566 70.6 26.0 35.3 c 30.6 c 53.6 63.9 Low human development 168 Pakistan 0.536 145 154 41.1 20.1 27.8 48.4 25.0 81.1 169 Senegal 0.490 127 261 60.2 46.1 15.4 24.8 39.2 68.7 170 Gambia 0.578 154 458 58.1 8.6 35.5 49.5 45.4 50.1 171 Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 0.604 162 547 106.9 14.8 40.8 c 66.7 c 59.7 66.0 172 Malawi 0.581 155 381 113.6 20.7 13.4 e 26.9 e 63.8 74.9 173 Benin 0.573 153 523 77.8 26.6 7.2 21.0 74.7 78.0 174 Guinea-Bissau 0.632 166 725 82.0 9.8 27.3 50.6 60.1 70.2 175 Djibouti 0.481 122 234 19.0 26.2 16.7 f 34.1 f 19.0 48.4 176 Sudan 0.588 158 270 66.1 31.0 q 22.5 26.9 14.4 61.9 177 Liberia 0.646 167 652 126.0 10.7 24.0 c 46.5 c 46.0 52.8 Continued → TABLE 5 / GENDER INEQUALITY INDEX 295 TABLE 5 SDG 3.1 SDG 3.7 SDG 5.5 SDG 4.4 Maternal Adolescent Share of seats Population with at least some Gender Inequality Index mortality ratio birth rate in parliament secondary education Labour force participation ratea (deaths per (births per 1,000 (% held (% ages 25 and older) (% ages 15 and older) Value Rank 100,000 live births) women ages 15–19) by women) Female Male Female Male HDI RANK 2023 2023 2020 2023 2023 2023b 2023b 2023 2023 178 Eritrea .. .. 322 65.2 22.0 p .. .. .. .. 179 Guinea 0.609 163 553 118.6 29.6 8.1 c 21.1 c 47.0 68.2 180 Ethiopia 0.497 131 267 69.9 38.8 7.4 c 12.7 c 55.6 78.1 181 Afghanistan 0.661 168 620 64.1 27.2 l 7.0 24.1 24.5 88.6 182 Mozambique 0.479 120 127 153.5 43.2 13.2 23.7 76.6 82.4 183 Madagascar 0.584 156 392 129.8 17.2 15.9 21.2 68.9 81.6 184 Yemen 0.838 172 183 75.3 0.3 20.7 47.2 5.9 65.7 185 Sierra Leone 0.566 152 443 93.6 28.2 14.7 c 34.4 c 50.2 56.3 186 Burkina Faso 0.555 146 264 87.1 16.9 7.3 13.0 41.8 54.5 187 Burundi 0.501 132 494 53.4 38.9 8.6 c 14.5 c 77.7 79.3 188 Mali 0.612 164 440 138.6 28.6 8.2 c 16.4 c 41.9 77.7 188 Niger 0.591 160 441 145.3 25.9 r 6.1 11.5 73.4 87.3 190 Chad 0.670 169 1,063 134.7 25.9 3.7 g 15.1 g 52.4 76.8 191 Central African Republic .. .. 835 163.1 12.9 14.6 32.0 .. .. 192 Somalia 0.675 170 621 117.1 20.7 4.4 17.8 22.2 49.5 193 South Sudan .. .. 1,223 97.1 32.3 26.5 s 36.4 s .. .. Other countries or territories Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of) .. .. 107 0.5 17.6 84.1 93.7 .. .. Monaco .. .. .. 9.7 45.8 .. .. 39.9 56.9 Human development groups Very high human development 0.125 — 14 10.1 30.2 90.8 92.7 54.1 69.3 High human development 0.334 — 67 25.5 25.6 65.7 72.2 50.4 74.8 Medium human development 0.513 — 291 44.8 22.5 41.1 56.5 43.4 76.6 Low human development 0.571 — 369 81.5 25.3 19.8 34.9 41.7 75.1 Developing countries 0.478 — 236 42.9 24.6 53.9 64.2 46.9 75.5 Regions Arab States 0.539 — 133 44.2 17.8 45.8 56.9 18.4 69.8 East Asia and the Pacific 0.315 — 78 15.5 21.7 64.6 73.2 55.0 76.4 Europe and Central Asia 0.226 — 21 19.5 26.0 82.3 90.3 45.7 69.3 Latin America and the Caribbean 0.384 — 85 51.4 34.2 66.2 66.1 51.8 75.1 South Asia 0.458 — 132 26.1 17.9 42.5 58.9 33.5 76.7 Sub-Saharan Africa 0.558 — 509 94.2 27.3 32.1 43.8 64.3 75.6 Least developed countries 0.552 — 352 90.6 25.6 24.3 35.2 51.0 75.0 Small island developing states 0.451 — 203 46.9 26.2 57.8 61.9 54.1 71.0 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 0.192 — 22 17.5 33.1 88.0 90.6 53.5 68.7 World 0.455 — 216 39.1 26.5 62.0 70.2 48.5 74.1 296 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 5 Notes Definitions Main data sources a Updated by HDRO based on data from International Gender Inequality Index: A composite measure reflecting in- Column 1: HDRO calculations based on data in columns 3–9. Labour Organization (2024). equality in achievement between women and men in three di- Column 2: Calculated based on data in column 1. mensions: reproductive health, empowerment and the labour b Data refer to 2023 or the most recent year available. market. See Technical note 4 at https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/ Column 3: WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, World Bank Group and c Updated by HDRO based on data from UNESCO Institute files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_technical_notes.pdf for details on how UNDESA/Population Division 2023. for Statistics (2024). the Gender Inequality Index is calculated. Column 4: UNDESA 2024a. d Refers to 2020 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics Maternal mortality ratio: Number of deaths due to pregnancy- Column 5: IPU 2024. (2024). related causes per 100,000 live births. Columns 6 and 7: Barro and Lee 2018, UNESCO Institute for e Updated by HDRO based on data from Barro and Lee Adolescent birth rate: Number of births to women ages 15–19 Statistics 2024 and UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. (2018) and UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). per 1,000 women ages 15–19. Columns 8 and 9: ILO 2024. f Updated by HDRO based on data from UNESCO Institute Share of seats in parliament: Proportion of seats held by for Statistics (2024) and estimates using cross-country women in the national parliament expressed as a percentage regression. of total seats. For countries with a bicameral legislative system, the share of seats is calculated based on both houses. g Refers to 2019 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). Population with at least some secondary education: Percentage of the population ages 25 and older that has reached (but not h Excludes the 36 special rotating delegates appointed on necessarily completed) a secondary level of education. an ad hoc basis. Labour force participation rate: Proportion of the working- i Refers to 2017 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics age population (ages 15 and older) that engages in the (2024). labour market, either by working or actively looking for work, j Refers to 2018 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics expressed as a percentage of the working-age population. (2024). k HDRO estimate based on data from Robert Barro and Jong-Wha Lee, ICF Macro Demographic and Health Surveys, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Institute for Statistics and United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. l Refers to 2021. m HDRO estimate based on data from Barro and Lee (2018), UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024) and UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. n Updated by HDRO based on data from UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024) and UNICEF Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys for various years. o Refers to 2013 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). p Refers to 2019. q Refers to 2018. r Refers to 2022. s Refers to 2008 based on UNESCO Institute for Statistics (2024). TABLE 5 / GENDER INEQUALITY INDEX 297 TABLE 6 Multidimensional Poverty Index: developing countries SDG 1.2 SDG 1.2 SDG 1.1 Contribution of deprivation Population living below in dimension to overall monetary poverty line Population in multidimensional povertya multidimensional povertya (%) Multidimensional Population Population Poverty Indexa Headcount Inequality in severe vulnerable to National Year and Intensity of among multidimensional multidimensional Standard poverty PPP $2.15 surveyb (thousands) deprivation the poor poverty povertya Health Education of living line a day In survey Country 2012–2023 Value (%) year 2022 (%) Value (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) 2012–2023c 2012–2023c Estimates based on surveys for 2018–2023 Afghanistan 2022/2023 M 0.360 d 64.9 d 26,897 d 26,329 d 55.5 d 0.020 d 39.1 d 19.9 d 24.1 d 42.5 d 33.4 d 54.5 .. Albania 2017/2018 D 0.003 0.7 20 20 39.1 .. e 0.1 5.0 28.3 55.1 16.7 22.0 0.0 Algeria 2018/2019 M 0.005 1.4 598 628 39.2 0.007 0.2 3.6 31.2 49.3 19.5 .. .. Argentina 2019/2020 M f 0.001 g 0.4 g 195 g 196 g 34.0 g .. e 0.0 g 1.6 g 69.7 g 21.4 g 8.9 g 39.2 0.6 Bangladesh 2019 M 0.104 24.6 40,636 41,737 42.2 0.010 6.5 18.2 17.3 37.6 45.1 18.7 5.0 Benin 2021/2022 M 0.290 55.9 7,695 7,695 51.8 0.021 30.8 17.8 18.9 38.8 42.3 38.5 12.7 Bhutan 2022 N 0.039 g,h 9.8 g,h 76 g,h 76 g,h 39.4 g,h 0.008 g,h 1.6 g,h 8.3 g,h 65.4 g,h 17.5 g,h 17.1 g,h 12.4 0.0 Burkina Faso 2021 D 0.343 64.5 14,181 14,513 53.2 0.022 38.3 15.8 19.6 39.2 41.1 43.2 25.3 Cambodia 2021/2022 D 0.070 16.6 2,863 2,863 42.3 0.009 4.1 20.5 21.5 48.0 30.5 17.7 .. Cameroon 2018 D 0.232 43.6 10,814 12,046 53.2 0.026 24.6 17.6 25.2 27.6 47.1 37.5 23.0 Central African Republic 2018/2019 M 0.461 80.4 3,976 4,100 57.4 0.025 55.8 12.9 20.2 27.8 52.0 68.8 65.7 Chad 2019 M 0.517 84.2 14,045 15,535 61.4 0.024 64.6 10.7 19.1 36.6 44.3 42.3 30.8 Comoros 2022 M 0.084 19.2 160 160 43.9 0.013 5.7 19.4 22.7 34.4 42.9 42.4 18.6 Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 2017/2018 M 0.331 64.5 58,097 66,064 51.3 0.020 36.8 17.4 23.1 19.9 57.0 63.9 78.9 Costa Rica 2018 M 0.002 d,g 0.5 d,g 27 d,g 27 d,g 37.1 d,g .. e 0.0 d,g 2.4 d,g 40.5 d,g 41.0 d,g 18.5 d,g 25.5 0.9 Côte d’Ivoire 2021 D 0.210 42.8 12,678 13,001 49.1 0.018 19.7 19.6 21.3 42.1 36.6 37.5 9.7 Cuba 2019 M 0.003 g 0.7 g 79 g 78 g 38.1 g .. e 0.1 g 2.7 g 10.1 g 39.8 g 50.1 g .. .. Dominican Republic 2019 M 0.009 2.3 247 255 38.8 0.006 0.2 4.8 14.6 46.2 39.2 23.9 0.8 Ecuador 2018 N 0.008 2.1 357 373 38.0 0.004 0.1 5.9 33.9 27.3 38.8 25.2 3.2 Eswatini (Kingdom of) 2021/2022 M 0.033 d 7.9 d 96 d 96 d 41.3 d 0.008 d 1.3 d 19.0 d 31.1 d 28.6 d 40.3 d 58.9 36.1 Ethiopia 2019 D 0.367 68.7 79,554 86,185 53.3 0.022 41.9 18.4 14.0 31.5 54.5 23.5 27.0 Fiji 2021 M 0.006 1.5 14 14 38.1 .. e 0.2 7.4 38.0 17.4 44.6 24.1 1.3 Gabon 2019/2021 D 0.037 8.6 206 210 42.4 0.010 2.3 14.9 34.6 24.4 41.0 33.4 2.5 Gambia 2019/2020 D 0.198 41.7 1,049 1,100 47.5 0.016 17.3 28.0 32.7 33.0 34.3 53.4 17.2 Georgia 2018 M 0.001 g 0.3 g 13 g 13 g 36.6 g .. e 0.0 g 2.1 g 47.1 g 23.8 g 29.1 g 15.6 5.5 Ghana 2022 D 0.113 24.8 8,221 8,221 45.5 0.016 8.4 20.0 25.1 28.9 46.0 23.4 25.2 Guinea 2018 D 0.373 66.2 8,412 9,306 56.4 0.025 43.5 16.4 21.4 38.4 40.3 43.7 13.8 Guinea-Bissau 2018/2019 M 0.341 64.4 1,267 1,356 52.9 0.021 35.9 20.0 19.1 35.0 45.8 47.7 26.0 Guyana 2019/2020 M 0.007 i 1.8 i 15 i 15 i 39.3 i 0.007 i 0.2 i 6.5 i 30.4 i 22.4 i 47.2 i .. .. Honduras 2019 M 0.051 12.0 1,191 1,253 42.7 0.011 3.0 14.8 18.8 39.2 42.0 48.0 12.7 India 2019/2021 D 0.069 16.4 231,828 233,667 42.0 0.010 4.2 18.7 32.2 28.2 39.7 .. 12.9 Iraq 2018 M 0.033 8.6 3,477 3,806 37.9 0.005 1.3 5.2 33.1 60.9 6.0 18.9 0.1 Jamaica 2018 N 0.011 j 2.8 j 78 j 79 j 38.9 j 0.005 j 0.2 j 5.0 j 52.2 j 20.9 j 26.9 j 19.9 0.3 Jordan 2017/2018 D 0.002 0.4 45 49 35.4 .. e 0.0 0.7 37.5 53.5 9.0 15.7 .. Kenya 2022 D 0.113 25.4 13,754 13,754 44.7 0.015 7.5 26.4 25.6 15.6 58.8 36.1 36.1 Kiribati 2018/2019 M 0.080 19.8 25 26 40.5 0.006 3.5 30.2 30.3 12.1 57.6 21.9 1.7 Kyrgyzstan 2018 M 0.001 0.4 25 27 36.3 .. e 0.0 5.2 64.6 17.9 17.5 33.3 0.7 Lesotho 2018 M 0.084 d 19.6 d 428 d 448 d 43.0 d 0.009 d 5.0 d 28.6 d 21.9 d 18.1 d 60.0 d 49.7 32.4 Liberia 2019/2020 D 0.259 52.3 2,694 2,811 49.6 0.018 24.9 23.3 19.7 28.6 51.7 50.9 27.6 Madagascar 2021 D 0.386 68.4 20,314 20,825 56.4 0.026 45.8 15.4 17.8 31.6 50.6 70.7 80.7 Malawi 2019/2020 M 0.231 49.9 9,744 10,260 46.3 0.012 17.5 27.5 18.6 25.5 55.9 50.7 70.1 Mali 2018 D 0.376 68.3 13,968 15,766 55.0 0.022 44.7 15.3 19.6 41.2 39.3 44.6 20.8 Mauritania 2019/2021 D 0.327 58.4 2,767 2,850 56.0 0.024 38.0 12.3 17.7 42.4 39.9 31.8 5.4 Mexico 2022 N 0.020 k,l 5.0 k,l 6,434 k,l 6,434 k,l 39.8 k,l 0.006 k,l 0.9 k,l 3.1 k,l 62.7 k,l 12.8 k,l 24.4 k,l 36.3 1.2 Mongolia 2018 M 0.028 m 7.3 m 230 m 246 m 38.8 m 0.004 m 0.8 m 15.5 m 21.1 m 26.8 m 52.1 m 27.8 0.2 Montenegro 2018 M 0.005 1.2 8 8 39.6 .. e 0.1 2.9 58.5 22.3 19.2 20.3 2.0 Morocco 2017/2018 P 0.027 n 6.4 n 2,279 n 2,374 n 42.0 n 0.012 n 1.4 n 10.9 n 24.4 n 46.8 n 28.8 n 4.8 1.4 Mozambique 2022/2023 D 0.334 60.7 20,407 19,813 55.1 0.022 38.8 16.9 17.3 33.2 49.5 46.1 74.5 Nepal 2022 D 0.085 20.1 5,963 5,963 42.5 0.011 5.5 20.2 28.8 30.6 40.6 .. .. Nigeria 2021 M 0.175 h,o 33.0 h,o 72,211 h,o 73,738 h,o 52.9 h,o 0.027 h,o 18.1 h,o 16.6 h,o 19.5 h,o 35.5 h,o 45.0 h,o 40.1 30.9 North Macedonia 2018/2019 M 0.001 0.4 7 7 38.2 .. e 0.1 2.2 29.6 52.6 17.8 21.8 2.7 Pakistan 2017/2018 D 0.198 38.3 86,987 93,416 51.7 0.023 21.5 12.9 27.6 41.3 31.1 21.9 4.9 Palestine, State of 2019/2020 M 0.002 0.6 29 30 35.0 .. e 0.0 1.3 62.9 31.0 6.1 29.2 0.5 Papua New Guinea 2016/2018 D 0.263 h 56.6 h 5,320 h 5,778 h 46.5 h 0.016 h 25.8 h 25.3 h 4.6 h 30.1 h 65.3 h .. .. Peru 2022 N 0.025 6.4 2,136 2,136 38.9 0.006 0.9 10.0 15.5 32.7 51.9 27.5 2.7 Philippines 2022 D 0.016 h 3.9 h 4,429 h 4,429 h 40.6 h 0.008 h 0.7 h 5.2 h 24.6 h 32.7 h 42.7 h 18.1 3.0 Rwanda 2019/2020 D 0.231 48.8 6,379 6,665 47.3 0.014 19.7 22.7 19.0 26.6 54.4 38.2 52.0 Samoa 2019/2020 M 0.025 6.3 13 14 39.1 0.003 0.5 12.9 36.9 31.2 31.9 21.9 1.2 Sao Tome and Principe 2019 M 0.048 11.7 25 27 40.9 0.007 2.1 17.0 18.7 36.6 44.6 55.5 15.7 Senegal 2019 D 0.263 50.8 8,313 8,972 51.7 0.019 27.7 18.2 20.7 48.4 30.9 .. 9.9 Continued → 298 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 6 SDG 1.2 SDG 1.2 SDG 1.1 Contribution of deprivation Population living below in dimension to overall monetary poverty line Population in multidimensional povertya multidimensional povertya (%) Multidimensional Population Population Poverty Indexa Headcount Inequality in severe vulnerable to National Year and Intensity of among multidimensional multidimensional Standard poverty PPP $2.15 surveyb (thousands) deprivation the poor poverty povertya Health Education of living line a day In survey Country 2012–2023 Value (%) year 2022 (%) Value (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) 2012–2023c 2012–2023c Serbia 2019 M 0.000 g,p 0.1 g,p 8 g,p 8 g,p 38.1 g,p .. e 0.0 g,p 2.1 g,p 30.9 g,p 40.1 g,p 29.0 g,p 20.0 1.2 Seychelles 2019 N 0.003 d,q 0.9 d,q 1 d,q 1 d,q 34.2 d,q .. e 0.0 d,q 0.4 d,q 66.8 d,q 32.1 d,q 1.1 d,q 25.3 0.5 Sierra Leone 2019 D 0.293 59.2 4,579 4,902 49.5 0.019 28.0 21.3 23.0 24.1 53.0 56.8 26.1 Suriname 2018 M 0.011 2.9 17 18 39.4 0.007 0.4 4.0 20.4 43.8 35.8 .. 1.1 Tanzania (United Republic of) 2022 D 0.221 47.2 30,554 30,554 46.9 0.014 18.3 23.1 24.2 22.6 53.2 26.4 44.9 Thailand 2022 M 0.002 g 0.5 g 352 g 352 g 37.0 g 0.003 g 0.0 g 4.7 g 31.2 g 54.0 g 14.7 g 6.3 0.0 Tonga 2019 M 0.003 0.9 1 1 38.1 .. e 0.0 6.4 38.2 40.7 21.1 20.6 0.0 Trinidad and Tobago 2022 M 0.002 h 0.5 h 8 h 8 h 38.8 h 0.005 h 0.1 h 0.8 h 64.2 h 23.7 h 12.1 h .. .. Tunisia 2023 M 0.003 1.0 119 118 35.2 0.002 0.0 2.8 28.1 61.8 10.1 16.6 0.3 Turkmenistan 2019 M 0.001 d 0.2 d 17 d 18 d 34.0 d .. e 0.0 d 0.3 d 82.4 d 15.5 d 2.1 d .. .. Tuvalu 2019/2020 M 0.008 2.1 0 0 38.2 0.002 0.0 12.2 36.5 43.6 20.0 .. .. Uzbekistan 2021/2022 M 0.006 h,r 1.7 h,r 604 h,r 604 h,r 35.3 h,r 0.001 h,r 0.0 h,r 0.2 h,r 94.5 h,r 0.0 h,r 5.5 h,r 14.1 2.3 Viet Nam 2020/2021 M 0.008 h 1.9 h 1,899 h 1,913 h 40.3 h 0.010 h 0.4 h 3.5 h 22.9 h 40.7 h 36.4 h 4.3 1.0 Yemen 2022/2023 M 0.188 s 37.4 s 14,740 s 14,303 s 50.2 s 0.019 s 17.0 s 22.5 s 28.4 s 31.7 s 39.9 s 48.6 19.8 Zambia 2018 D 0.232 47.9 8,610 9,654 48.4 0.015 21.0 23.9 21.5 25.0 53.5 60.0 64.3 Zimbabwe 2019 M 0.110 25.8 3,940 4,146 42.6 0.009 6.8 26.3 23.6 17.3 59.2 38.3 39.8 Estimates based on surveys for 2012–2017 Angola 2015/2016 D 0.282 51.1 14,914 18,211 55.3 0.024 32.5 15.5 21.2 32.1 46.8 32.3 31.1 Armenia 2015/2016 D 0.001 t 0.2 t 6 t 5 t 36.2 t .. e 0.0 t 2.8 t 33.1 t 36.8 t 30.1 t 24.8 0.8 Barbados 2012 M 0.009 j 2.5 j 7 j 7 j 34.2 j .. e 0.0 j 0.5 j 96.0 j 0.7 j 3.3 j .. .. Belize 2015/2016 M 0.017 4.3 16 17 39.8 0.007 0.6 8.4 39.5 20.9 39.6 .. .. Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 2016 N 0.038 9.1 1,013 1,094 41.7 0.008 1.9 12.1 18.7 31.5 49.8 36.4 2.0 Bosnia and Herzegovina 2011/2012 M 0.008 j 2.2 j 80 j 70 j 37.9 j 0.002 j 0.1 j 4.1 j 79.7 j 7.2 j 13.1 j 16.9 .. Botswana 2015/2016 N 0.073 u 17.2 u 385 u 420 u 42.2 u 0.008 u 3.5 u 19.7 u 30.3 u 16.5 u 53.2 u 16.1 15.4 Brazil 2015 N v 0.016 g,h,v 3.8 g,h,v 7,748 g,h,v 8,080 g,h,v 42.5 g,h,v 0.008 g,h,v 0.9 g,h,v 6.2 g,h,v 49.8 g,h,v 22.9 g,h,v 27.3 g,h,v .. 3.5 Burundi 2016/2017 D 0.409 t 75.1 t 8,641 t 10,004 t 54.4 t 0.022 t 46.1 t 15.8 t 23.8 t 27.2 t 49.0 t 64.9 62.1 China 2014 N w 0.016 s,x 3.9 s,x 53,922 s,x 55,369 s,x 41.4 s,x 0.005 s,x 0.3 s,x 17.4 s,x 35.2 s,x 39.2 s,x 25.6 s,x 0.0 0.1 Colombia 2015/2016 D 0.020 h 4.8 h 2,299 h 2,507 h 40.6 h 0.009 h 0.8 h 6.2 h 12.0 h 39.5 h 48.5 h 36.6 6.0 Congo 2014/2015 M 0.112 24.3 1,237 1,465 46.0 0.013 9.4 21.3 23.4 20.2 56.4 .. .. Egypt 2014 D 0.020 d,t 5.2 d,t 5,109 d,t 5,900 d,t 37.6 d,t 0.004 d,t 0.6 d,t 6.1 d,t 40.0 d,t 53.1 d,t 6.9 d,t 29.7 1.5 El Salvador 2014 M 0.032 7.9 484 494 41.3 0.009 1.7 9.9 15.5 43.4 41.1 26.6 3.4 Guatemala 2014/2015 D 0.134 28.9 4,613 5,155 46.2 0.013 11.2 21.1 26.3 35.0 38.7 59.3 9.5 Haiti 2016/2017 D 0.200 41.3 4,464 4,747 48.4 0.019 18.5 21.8 18.5 24.6 57.0 58.5 29.2 Indonesia 2017 D 0.014 h 3.6 h 9,675 h 10,091 h 38.7 h 0.006 h 0.4 h 4.7 h 34.7 h 26.8 h 38.5 h 9.4 1.9 Kazakhstan 2015 M 0.002 g,t 0.5 g,t 82 g,t 91 g,t 35.6 g,t .. e 0.0 g,t 1.8 g,t 90.4 g,t 3.1 g,t 6.4 g,t 5.2 0.0 Lao People’s Democratic Republic 2017 M 0.108 23.1 1,619 1,744 47.0 0.016 9.6 21.2 21.5 39.7 38.8 18.3 7.1 Libya 2014 P 0.007 2.0 128 144 37.1 0.003 0.1 11.4 39.0 48.6 12.4 .. .. Maldives 2016/2017 D 0.003 0.8 4 4 34.4 .. e 0.0 4.8 80.7 15.1 4.2 5.4 0.0 Moldova (Republic of) 2012 M 0.004 0.9 33 29 37.4 .. e 0.1 3.7 9.2 42.4 48.4 31.1 0.0 Myanmar 2015/2016 D 0.176 38.3 19,731 20,597 45.9 0.015 13.8 21.9 18.5 32.3 49.2 24.8 2.0 Namibia 2013 D 0.185 t 40.9 t 921 t 1,181 t 45.2 t 0.013 t 13.1 t 19.2 t 31.6 t 13.9 t 54.4 t 17.4 15.6 Nicaragua 2011/2012 D 0.074 t 16.5 t 971 t 1,108 t 45.3 t 0.013 t 5.6 t 13.4 t 11.5 t 36.2 t 52.3 t 24.9 3.9 Niger 2012 D 0.601 t 91.0 t 16,226 t 23,027 t 66.1 t 0.026 t 76.3 t 4.9 t 21.4 t 36.7 t 41.8 t 40.8 50.6 Paraguay 2016 M 0.019 4.5 281 304 41.9 0.013 1.0 7.2 14.3 38.9 46.8 24.7 1.3 Saint Lucia 2012 M 0.007 j 1.9 j 3 j 3 j 37.5 j .. e 0.0 j 1.6 j 69.5 j 7.5 j 23.0 j 0.3 0.1 South Africa 2016 D 0.025 6.3 3,583 3,903 39.8 0.005 0.9 12.2 39.5 13.1 47.4 55.5 20.5 Sri Lanka 2016 N 0.011 2.9 640 667 38.3 0.004 0.3 14.3 32.5 24.4 43.0 14.3 1.0 Sudan 2014 M 0.279 52.3 20,315 25,841 53.4 0.023 30.9 17.7 21.1 29.2 49.8 .. 15.3 Tajikistan 2017 D 0.029 7.4 676 758 39.0 0.004 0.7 20.1 47.8 26.5 25.8 22.5 6.1 Timor-Leste 2016 D 0.222 t 48.3 t 593 t 661 t 45.9 t 0.014 t 17.4 t 26.8 t 29.3 t 23.1 t 47.6 t 41.8 24.4 Togo 2017 M 0.180 37.6 3,030 3,419 47.8 0.016 15.2 23.8 20.9 28.1 50.9 45.5 26.6 Uganda 2016 D 0.281 t 57.2 t 22,181 t 27,048 t 49.2 t 0.017 t 25.7 t 23.6 t 24.0 t 21.6 t 54.5 t 20.3 42.1 Ukraine 2012 M 0.001 h,t 0.2 h,t 113 h,t 100 h,t 34.4 h,t .. e 0.0 h,t 0.4 h,t 60.5 h,t 28.4 h,t 11.2 h,t 1.6 0.0 Developing countries — 0.089 18.3 1,085,191 1,148,746 48.5 0.017 8.0 14.8 24.3 32.0 43.6 19.4 11.5 Regions Arab States — 0.072 14.7 46,840 53,193 48.9 0.018 6.5 9.2 25.7 34.6 39.7 25.9 5.8 East Asia and the Pacific — 0.021 5.0 100,687 104,097 42.4 0.008 0.9 14.2 28.4 36.0 35.7 3.6 0.6 Europe and Central Asia — 0.004 1.2 1,692 1,758 37.1 0.003 0.1 2.6 66.7 16.5 16.8 12.0 1.4 Latin America and the Caribbean — 0.025 5.8 32,683 34,389 42.9 0.010 1.5 6.4 34.3 27.0 38.7 36.2 3.6 South Asia — 0.094 20.8 393,030 401,859 45.2 0.014 7.3 17.9 28.8 33.8 37.4 23.1 11.0 Sub-Saharan Africa — 0.254 48.4 510,259 553,451 52.5 0.021 26.9 18.2 20.2 30.4 49.3 40.9 38.6 TABLE 6 / MULTIDIMENSIONAL POVERTY INDEX: DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 299 TABLE 6 Notes u Captures only deaths of children under age 5 who died Main data sources in the last five years and deaths of children ages 12–18 a Not all indicators were available for all countries, so years who died in the last two years. Column 1: Refers to the year and the survey whose data were caution should be used in cross-country comparisons. used to calculate the country’s Multidimensional Poverty Index When an indicator is missing, weights of available v The methodology was adjusted to account for the value and its components. indicators are adjusted to total 100 percent. See missing indicator on nutrition and the incomplete Technical note 5 at https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/ indicator on child mortality (the survey did not collect the Columns 2–12: HDRO and OPHI calculations based on data on files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_technical_notes.pdf. date of child deaths). household deprivations in health, education, and standard of liv- ing from various surveys listed in column 1 using the methodol- b D indicates data from Demographic and Health Surveys, w Based on the version of data accessed on 7 June 2016. ogy described in Technical note 5 at https://hdr.undp.org/sites/ M indicates data from Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys, x Given the information available in the data, child default/files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_technical_notes.pdf. N indicates data from national surveys and ˆ indicates mortality was constructed based on deaths that Column 4 and 5: Population data from UNDESA (2024b). data from Pan Arab Population and Family Health occurred between surveys—that is, between 2012 and Surveys (see https://hdr.undp.org/mpi-2024-faqs and 2014. Child deaths reported by an adult man in the Columns 13 and 14: World Bank 2024b. OPHI Methodological Note 58 at https://ophi.org.uk / household were taken into account because the date of publications/MN-58 for the list of national surveys). death was reported. c Data refer to the most recent year available during the period specified. d Missing indicator on cooking fuel. Definitions e Value is not reported because it is based on a small number of multidimensionally poor people. Multidimensional Poverty Index: Proportion of the population that is multidimensionally poor adjusted by the intensity of the f Urban areas only. deprivations. g Considers child deaths that occurred at any time because Multidimensional poverty headcount: Population with a the survey did not collect the date of child deaths. deprivation score of at least 33.3 percent. It is expressed as h Missing indicator on nutrition. a share of the population in the survey year, the number of multidimensionally poor people in the survey year and the i Revised estimate from the 2022 MPI based on the projected number of multidimensionally poor people in 2022. survey microdata update. Intensity of deprivation of multidimensional poverty: Average j Missing indicator on child mortality. deprivation score experienced by people in multidimensional k Child mortality data were not used because the data poverty. were collected from a sample of women ages 15–49 that Inequality among the poor: Variance of individual deprivation was not representative of the female population in that scores of poor people. It is calculated by subtracting the age group. deprivation score of each multidimensionally poor person from l Anthropometric data were collected from all children the intensity, squaring the differences and dividing the sum under age 5 and from selected individuals who are age of the weighted squares by the number of multidimensionally 5 or older. Construction of the nutrition indicator was poor people. restricted to children under age 5 since the anthropometric Population in severe multidimensional poverty: Percentage sample is representative of the under 5 population. of the population in severe multidimensional poverty—that is, m Indicator on sanitation follows the national classification those with a deprivation score of 50 percent or more. in which pit latrine with slab is considered unimproved. Population vulnerable to multidimensional poverty: Percentage n Following the national report, latrines are considered an of the population at risk of suffering multiple deprivations—that improved source for the sanitation indicator. is, those with a deprivation score of 20–33.3 percent. o The analytical sample was restricted to the Multiple Contribution of deprivation in dimension to overall multi‑ Indicator Cluster Survey sample, and its sample weight dimensional poverty: Percentage of the Multidimensional was used, because child mortality information was Poverty Index attributed to deprivations in each dimension. not collected for the National Immunization Coverage Population living below national poverty line: Percentage of Survey sample. the population living below the national poverty line, which p Because of the high proportion of children excluded is the poverty line deemed appropriate for a country by its from nutrition indicators due to measurements not being authorities. National estimates are based on population- taken, estimates based on the 2019 Serbia Multiple weighted subgroup estimates from household surveys. Indicator Cluster Survey should be interpreted with Population living below PPP $2.15 a day: Percentage of the caution. The unweighted sample size used for the multi- population living below the international poverty line of $2.15 (in dimensional poverty calculation is 82.8 percent. 2017 purchasing power parity [PPP] terms) a day. q Missing indicator on school attendance. r The analytical sample was restricted to the round 2 sample because standard of living questions were not collected for the round 1 sample. s Missing indicator on housing. t Revised estimate from the 2020 MPI. 300 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 7 Planetary pressures–adjusted Human Development Index SDG 9.4 SDG 8.4, 12.2 Human Adjustment factor Carbon dioxide Carbon dioxide Development for planetary emissions per emissions Material footprint Material Index (HDI) Planetary pressures–adjusted HDI (PHDI) pressures capita (production) (production) index per capita footprint index Difference from Difference from Value Value HDI valuea (%) HDI ranka Value (tonnes) Value (tonnes) Value HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 Very high human development 1 Iceland 0.972 0.735 24.4 –40 0.756 10.0 0.869 32.2 0.643 2 Norway 0.970 0.723 25.5 –49 0.746 7.1 0.907 37.5 0.584 2 Switzerland 0.970 0.732 24.5 –41 0.755 3.7 0.951 39.8 0.559 4 Denmark 0.962 0.792 17.7 –6 0.824 4.6 0.940 26.4 0.708 5 Germany 0.959 0.785 18.1 –9 0.819 7.2 0.907 24.3 0.730 5 Sweden 0.959 0.810 15.5 2 0.845 3.4 0.955 24.0 0.734 7 Australia 0.958 0.700 26.9 –59 0.731 14.5 0.811 31.5 0.651 8 Hong Kong, China (SAR) 0.955 .. .. .. .. 4.5 0.941 .. .. 8 Netherlands 0.955 0.740 22.5 –27 0.775 6.7 0.912 32.7 0.638 10 Belgium 0.951 0.666 30.0 –76 0.700 7.1 0.907 45.7 0.494 11 Ireland 0.949 0.752 20.8 –20 0.793 6.8 0.911 29.4 0.674 12 Finland 0.948 0.748 21.1 –22 0.789 5.7 0.926 31.4 0.652 13 Singapore 0.946 0.618 34.7 –90 0.653 8.2 0.893 53.0 0.412 13 United Kingdom 0.946 0.827 12.6 11 0.875 4.5 0.941 17.3 0.808 15 United Arab Emirates 0.940 0.585 37.8 –97 0.622 24.1 0.685 39.8 0.559 16 Canada 0.939 0.643 31.5 –79 0.684 14.2 0.815 40.3 0.554 17 Liechtenstein 0.938 .. .. .. .. 4.0 0.948 .. .. 17 New Zealand 0.938 0.731 22.1 –28 0.779 5.8 0.925 33.1 0.634 17 United States 0.938 0.686 26.9 –57 0.731 14.4 0.811 31.5 0.651 20 Korea (Republic of) 0.937 0.745 20.5 –16 0.795 11.2 0.854 23.9 0.736 21 Slovenia 0.931 0.791 15.0 7 0.850 5.3 0.930 20.8 0.769 22 Austria 0.930 0.757 18.6 –3 0.814 6.5 0.915 25.8 0.714 23 Japan 0.925 0.785 15.1 7 0.849 8.0 0.895 17.9 0.802 24 Malta 0.924 0.799 13.5 14 0.864 3.4 0.956 20.5 0.773 25 Luxembourg 0.922 0.479 48.0 –122 0.519 10.7 0.861 74.2 0.178 26 France 0.920 0.804 12.6 20 0.874 4.2 0.945 17.7 0.804 27 Israel 0.919 0.709 22.9 –34 0.772 6.5 0.915 33.6 0.628 28 Spain 0.918 0.818 10.9 24 0.891 4.7 0.939 14.2 0.843 29 Czechia 0.915 0.764 16.5 7 0.835 8.2 0.894 20.2 0.776 29 Italy 0.915 0.801 12.5 20 0.876 5.3 0.930 16.2 0.821 29 San Marino 0.915 .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 32 Andorra 0.913 .. .. .. .. 5.3 0.931 .. .. 32 Cyprus 0.913 0.754 17.4 2 0.826 5.7 0.926 24.7 0.726 34 Greece 0.908 0.803 11.6 24 0.884 5.3 0.930 14.6 0.838 35 Poland 0.906 0.792 12.6 21 0.874 7.1 0.908 14.5 0.840 36 Estonia 0.905 0.714 21.1 –23 0.789 7.6 0.901 29.1 0.677 37 Saudi Arabia 0.900 0.666 26.0 –52 0.740 19.9 0.740 23.5 0.739 38 Bahrain 0.899 0.632 29.7 –63 0.703 24.6 0.679 24.6 0.728 39 Lithuania 0.895 0.751 16.1 4 0.840 4.6 0.940 23.6 0.739 40 Portugal 0.890 0.797 10.4 27 0.896 3.6 0.953 14.5 0.839 41 Croatia 0.889 0.787 11.5 24 0.886 4.4 0.943 15.5 0.828 41 Latvia 0.889 0.749 15.7 5 0.843 3.6 0.954 24.2 0.732 43 Qatar 0.886 0.276 68.8 –117 0.311 42.6 0.444 74.1 0.179 44 Slovakia 0.880 0.770 12.5 21 0.875 5.3 0.931 16.3 0.819 45 Chile 0.878 0.784 10.7 25 0.893 3.9 0.949 14.6 0.838 46 Hungary 0.870 0.757 13.0 19 0.870 4.0 0.948 18.8 0.792 47 Argentina 0.865 0.763 11.8 22 0.882 4.3 0.944 16.3 0.819 48 Montenegro 0.862 .. .. .. .. 3.7 0.951 .. .. 48 Uruguay 0.862 0.804 6.7 40 0.933 2.3 0.970 9.5 0.895 50 Oman 0.858 0.581 32.3 –69 0.677 16.9 0.779 38.5 0.574 51 Türkiye 0.853 0.729 14.5 1 0.854 5.0 0.934 20.4 0.774 52 Kuwait 0.852 0.531 37.7 –82 0.624 23.0 0.699 40.8 0.548 53 Antigua and Barbuda 0.851 .. .. .. .. 6.8 0.911 .. .. 54 Seychelles 0.848 .. .. .. .. 5.1 0.933 .. .. 55 Bulgaria 0.845 0.740 12.4 13 0.875 5.4 0.930 16.2 0.821 55 Romania 0.845 0.739 12.5 10 0.874 3.4 0.955 18.6 0.794 57 Georgia 0.844 0.772 8.5 32 0.915 3.2 0.959 11.6 0.871 58 Saint Kitts and Nevis 0.840 .. .. .. .. 4.9 0.936 .. .. 59 Panama 0.839 0.643 23.4 –43 0.766 3.1 0.959 38.5 0.573 Continued → TABLE 7 / PLANETARY PRESSURES–ADJUSTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX 301 TABLE 7 SDG 9.4 SDG 8.4, 12.2 Human Adjustment factor Carbon dioxide Carbon dioxide Development for planetary emissions per emissions Material footprint Material Index (HDI) Planetary pressures–adjusted HDI (PHDI) pressures capita (production) (production) index per capita footprint index Difference from Difference from Value Value HDI valuea (%) HDI ranka Value (tonnes) Value (tonnes) Value HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 60 Brunei Darussalam 0.837 0.600 28.3 –55 0.717 26.0 0.661 20.4 0.774 60 Kazakhstan 0.837 0.687 17.9 –20 0.820 13.0 0.830 17.1 0.811 62 Costa Rica 0.833 0.774 7.1 37 0.929 1.6 0.979 11.0 0.878 62 Serbia 0.833 0.724 13.1 4 0.869 5.9 0.923 16.7 0.815 64 Russian Federation 0.832 0.710 14.7 –2 0.853 12.6 0.836 11.7 0.871 65 Belarus 0.824 .. .. .. .. 5.9 0.922 .. .. 66 Bahamas 0.820 0.712 13.2 0 0.868 6.1 0.921 16.7 0.815 67 Malaysia 0.819 0.677 17.3 –21 0.827 8.4 0.890 21.4 0.763 68 North Macedonia 0.815 0.754 7.5 32 0.925 3.6 0.953 9.3 0.897 69 Armenia 0.811 0.761 6.2 38 0.938 2.7 0.964 8.0 0.912 69 Barbados 0.811 .. .. .. .. 4.2 0.945 .. .. 71 Albania 0.810 0.755 6.8 35 0.933 1.8 0.976 10.0 0.889 72 Trinidad and Tobago 0.807 .. .. .. .. 22.4 0.708 .. .. 73 Mauritius 0.806 .. .. .. .. 3.2 0.958 .. .. 74 Bosnia and Herzegovina 0.804 0.701 12.8 –3 0.872 6.3 0.918 15.7 0.826 High human development 75 Iran (Islamic Republic of) 0.799 0.725 9.3 14 0.907 9.2 0.880 5.9 0.934 76 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 0.798 .. .. .. .. 2.3 0.970 .. .. 76 Thailand 0.798 0.726 9.0 18 0.910 3.7 0.952 11.9 0.869 78 China 0.797 0.644 19.2 –27 0.808 8.3 0.891 24.9 0.724 79 Peru 0.794 0.757 4.7 43 0.953 1.6 0.979 6.6 0.927 80 Grenada 0.791 .. .. .. .. 2.7 0.965 .. .. 81 Azerbaijan 0.789 0.737 6.6 27 0.934 4.2 0.945 6.9 0.924 81 Mexico 0.789 0.721 8.6 14 0.914 3.8 0.951 11.2 0.876 83 Colombia 0.788 0.740 6.1 34 0.939 2.0 0.974 8.6 0.905 84 Brazil 0.786 0.702 10.7 7 0.893 2.2 0.971 16.6 0.816 84 Palau 0.786 .. .. .. .. 12.3 0.839 .. .. 86 Moldova (Republic of) 0.785 0.738 6.0 32 0.940 1.7 0.977 8.8 0.903 87 Ukraine 0.779 0.717 8.0 18 0.920 3.7 0.952 10.0 0.889 88 Ecuador 0.777 0.735 5.4 32 0.946 2.4 0.969 6.9 0.923 89 Dominican Republic 0.776 0.726 6.4 28 0.936 2.8 0.963 8.3 0.908 89 Guyana 0.776 .. .. .. .. 4.4 0.943 .. .. 89 Sri Lanka 0.776 0.754 2.8 47 0.971 0.9 0.988 4.1 0.955 92 Tonga 0.769 .. .. .. .. 1.8 0.976 .. .. 93 Maldives 0.766 .. .. .. .. 4.0 0.948 .. .. 93 Viet Nam 0.766 0.699 8.7 9 0.913 3.4 0.956 11.7 0.870 95 Turkmenistan 0.764 0.667 12.7 –7 0.874 9.7 0.873 11.4 0.874 96 Algeria 0.763 0.706 7.5 18 0.926 3.9 0.949 8.8 0.902 97 Cuba 0.762 0.723 5.1 28 0.949 2.1 0.973 6.8 0.924 98 Dominica 0.761 .. .. .. .. 2.2 0.971 .. .. 99 Paraguay 0.756 0.689 8.9 9 0.912 1.2 0.985 14.6 0.839 100 Egypt 0.754 0.726 3.7 35 0.963 2.4 0.969 3.9 0.956 100 Jordan 0.754 0.714 5.3 26 0.947 1.9 0.976 7.4 0.918 102 Lebanon 0.752 0.691 8.1 13 0.919 3.6 0.953 10.3 0.886 103 Saint Lucia 0.748 .. .. .. .. 2.8 0.963 .. .. 104 Mongolia 0.747 0.577 22.8 –31 0.773 13.6 0.823 25.0 0.723 105 Tunisia 0.746 0.703 5.8 23 0.942 2.6 0.966 7.3 0.919 106 South Africa 0.741 0.685 7.6 11 0.924 6.7 0.913 5.8 0.936 107 Uzbekistan 0.740 0.702 5.1 24 0.949 3.5 0.954 5.1 0.944 108 Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 0.733 0.675 7.9 8 0.921 1.9 0.975 12.1 0.866 108 Gabon 0.733 0.704 4.0 27 0.961 2.2 0.971 4.4 0.951 108 Marshall Islands 0.733 .. .. .. .. 3.7 0.952 .. .. 111 Botswana 0.731 0.698 4.5 21 0.954 2.5 0.967 5.3 0.941 111 Fiji 0.731 .. .. .. .. 1.2 0.984 .. .. 113 Indonesia 0.728 0.684 6.0 15 0.940 2.6 0.966 7.7 0.915 114 Suriname 0.722 .. .. .. .. 4.2 0.945 .. .. 115 Belize 0.721 0.670 7.1 10 0.929 1.6 0.979 10.9 0.879 115 Libya 0.721 0.629 12.8 –7 0.872 8.9 0.884 12.7 0.859 117 Jamaica 0.720 0.686 4.7 21 0.953 2.7 0.965 5.2 0.942 117 Kyrgyzstan 0.720 0.699 2.9 27 0.971 1.5 0.980 3.4 0.962 Continued → 302 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 7 SDG 9.4 SDG 8.4, 12.2 Human Adjustment factor Carbon dioxide Carbon dioxide Development for planetary emissions per emissions Material footprint Material Index (HDI) Planetary pressures–adjusted HDI (PHDI) pressures capita (production) (production) index per capita footprint index Difference from Difference from Value Value HDI valuea (%) HDI ranka Value (tonnes) Value (tonnes) Value HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 117 Philippines 0.720 0.680 5.6 17 0.944 1.3 0.983 8.6 0.905 120 Morocco 0.710 0.679 4.4 19 0.956 1.8 0.976 5.8 0.935 121 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 0.709 0.652 8.0 7 0.920 3.5 0.955 10.4 0.885 122 Samoa 0.708 .. .. .. .. 1.1 0.985 .. .. 123 Nicaragua 0.706 0.668 5.4 16 0.946 0.8 0.990 8.8 0.902 124 Nauru 0.703 .. .. .. .. 4.5 0.941 .. .. Medium human development 125 Bhutan 0.698 0.593 15.0 –8 0.849 2.2 0.972 24.7 0.727 126 Eswatini (Kingdom of) 0.695 .. .. .. .. 0.9 0.988 .. .. 126 Iraq 0.695 0.665 4.3 13 0.957 3.9 0.949 3.2 0.964 128 Tajikistan 0.691 0.673 2.6 21 0.974 0.9 0.988 3.6 0.960 129 Tuvalu 0.689 .. .. .. .. 1.0 0.987 .. .. 130 Bangladesh 0.685 0.666 2.8 18 0.972 0.7 0.991 4.3 0.952 130 India 0.685 0.656 4.2 14 0.957 2.1 0.972 5.2 0.942 132 El Salvador 0.678 0.638 5.9 9 0.941 1.3 0.983 9.1 0.899 133 Equatorial Guinea 0.674 0.644 4.5 14 0.955 3.6 0.953 3.9 0.957 133 Palestine, State of 0.674 0.653 3.1 16 0.969 0.7 0.992 4.9 0.946 135 Cabo Verde 0.668 .. .. .. .. 0.9 0.988 .. .. 136 Namibia 0.665 0.611 8.1 5 0.918 1.6 0.979 12.8 0.858 137 Guatemala 0.662 0.626 5.4 9 0.946 1.1 0.985 8.5 0.906 138 Congo 0.649 0.631 2.8 12 0.973 1.3 0.984 3.5 0.962 139 Honduras 0.645 0.620 3.9 10 0.961 1.0 0.986 5.9 0.935 140 Kiribati 0.644 .. .. .. .. 0.5 0.993 .. .. 141 Sao Tome and Principe 0.637 .. .. .. .. 0.7 0.991 .. .. 142 Timor-Leste 0.634 .. .. .. .. 0.5 0.994 .. .. 143 Ghana 0.628 0.604 3.8 7 0.962 0.6 0.992 6.2 0.932 143 Kenya 0.628 0.610 2.9 8 0.971 0.4 0.995 4.8 0.946 145 Nepal 0.622 0.592 4.8 4 0.952 0.5 0.993 7.9 0.912 146 Vanuatu 0.621 .. .. .. .. 0.7 0.991 .. .. 147 Lao People's Democratic Republic 0.617 0.570 7.6 –3 0.923 3.2 0.958 10.0 0.889 148 Angola 0.616 0.604 1.9 11 0.980 0.6 0.993 2.9 0.967 149 Micronesia (Federated States of) 0.615 .. .. .. .. 1.3 0.983 .. .. 150 Myanmar 0.609 0.593 2.6 9 0.973 0.6 0.993 4.2 0.953 151 Cambodia 0.606 0.572 5.6 1 0.944 1.2 0.984 8.7 0.903 152 Comoros 0.603 .. .. .. .. 0.5 0.993 .. .. 153 Zimbabwe 0.598 0.585 2.2 8 0.978 0.7 0.991 3.1 0.965 154 Zambia 0.595 0.585 1.7 9 0.983 0.4 0.995 2.7 0.970 155 Cameroon 0.588 0.574 2.4 5 0.976 0.3 0.995 4.0 0.956 156 Solomon Islands 0.584 .. .. .. .. 0.4 0.995 .. .. 157 Côte d'Ivoire 0.582 0.537 7.7 –6 0.922 0.5 0.994 13.5 0.850 157 Uganda 0.582 0.569 2.2 3 0.978 0.1 0.998 3.9 0.957 159 Rwanda 0.578 0.567 1.9 4 0.980 0.1 0.999 3.4 0.962 160 Papua New Guinea 0.576 0.566 1.7 4 0.982 0.8 0.989 2.3 0.974 161 Togo 0.571 0.562 1.6 4 0.984 0.3 0.996 2.5 0.972 162 Syrian Arab Republic 0.564 0.553 2.0 4 0.981 1.1 0.986 2.2 0.976 163 Mauritania 0.563 0.542 3.7 2 0.962 0.9 0.988 5.8 0.936 164 Nigeria 0.560 0.548 2.1 5 0.979 0.6 0.993 3.2 0.965 165 Tanzania (United Republic of) 0.555 0.541 2.5 3 0.975 0.3 0.997 4.3 0.953 166 Haiti 0.554 0.545 1.6 6 0.984 0.3 0.996 2.5 0.972 167 Lesotho 0.550 .. .. .. .. 1.7 0.978 .. .. Low human development 168 Pakistan 0.544 0.529 2.8 2 0.973 0.8 0.989 3.9 0.956 169 Senegal 0.530 0.512 3.4 0 0.966 0.7 0.991 5.4 0.940 170 Gambia 0.524 0.514 1.9 2 0.982 0.3 0.997 3.0 0.966 171 Congo (Democratic Republic of the) 0.522 0.517 1.0 4 0.990 0.0 0.999 1.8 0.980 172 Malawi 0.517 0.507 1.9 2 0.980 0.1 0.999 3.5 0.961 173 Benin 0.515 0.504 2.1 1 0.978 0.4 0.995 3.5 0.961 174 Guinea-Bissau 0.514 .. .. .. .. 0.1 0.998 .. .. 175 Djibouti 0.513 0.480 6.4 –6 0.936 0.4 0.994 11.0 0.878 176 Sudan 0.511 0.498 2.5 2 0.974 0.4 0.995 4.2 0.954 Continued → TABLE 7 / PLANETARY PRESSURES–ADJUSTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX 303 TABLE 7 SDG 9.4 SDG 8.4, 12.2 Human Adjustment factor Carbon dioxide Carbon dioxide Development for planetary emissions per emissions Material footprint Material Index (HDI) Planetary pressures–adjusted HDI (PHDI) pressures capita (production) (production) index per capita footprint index Difference from Difference from Value Value HDI valuea (%) HDI ranka Value (tonnes) Value (tonnes) Value HDI RANK 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 2023 177 Liberia 0.510 0.505 1.0 5 0.990 0.1 0.998 1.7 0.982 178 Eritrea 0.503 0.496 1.4 3 0.986 0.2 0.998 2.4 0.974 179 Guinea 0.500 0.488 2.4 2 0.975 0.3 0.996 4.1 0.955 180 Ethiopia 0.497 0.487 2.0 2 0.980 0.1 0.998 3.5 0.962 181 Afghanistan 0.496 0.492 0.8 5 0.991 0.3 0.997 1.2 0.986 182 Mozambique 0.493 0.486 1.4 3 0.986 0.2 0.997 2.3 0.975 183 Madagascar 0.487 0.481 1.2 3 0.988 0.1 0.998 2.0 0.977 184 Yemen 0.470 0.465 1.1 1 0.989 0.3 0.996 1.6 0.982 185 Sierra Leone 0.467 0.459 1.7 1 0.983 0.1 0.998 2.9 0.967 186 Burkina Faso 0.459 0.453 1.3 1 0.987 0.3 0.997 2.0 0.978 187 Burundi 0.439 0.435 0.9 1 0.991 0.1 0.999 1.6 0.982 188 Mali 0.419 0.411 1.9 1 0.981 0.3 0.996 3.2 0.965 188 Niger 0.419 0.410 2.1 0 0.979 0.1 0.999 3.6 0.960 190 Chad 0.416 0.397 4.6 0 0.954 0.2 0.998 8.1 0.910 191 Central African Republic 0.414 0.407 1.7 2 0.983 0.0 0.999 2.9 0.968 192 Somalia 0.404 0.396 2.0 1 0.979 0.0 1.000 3.7 0.959 193 South Sudan 0.388 0.383 1.3 1 0.986 0.1 0.998 2.3 0.974 Other countries or territories .. Korea (Democratic People’s Rep. of) .. .. .. .. 0.961 2.3 0.970 4.2 0.953 .. Monaco .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. Human development groups Very high human development 0.914 0.741 18.9 — 0.811 9.4 0.877 23.0 0.746 High human development 0.777 0.677 12.9 — 0.871 5.6 0.926 16.6 0.816 Medium human development 0.656 0.631 3.8 — 0.963 1.6 0.980 4.9 0.945 Low human development 0.515 0.505 1.9 — 0.980 0.4 0.995 3.2 0.964 Developing countries 0.712 0.653 8.3 — 0.917 3.6 0.953 10.7 0.881 Regions Arab States 0.719 0.665 7.5 — 0.926 4.6 0.940 8.1 0.911 East Asia and the Pacific 0.775 0.658 15.1 — 0.849 6.5 0.916 19.7 0.782 Europe and Central Asia 0.818 0.731 10.6 — 0.893 5.0 0.934 13.3 0.852 Latin America and the Caribbean 0.783 0.715 8.7 — 0.913 2.7 0.965 12.5 0.861 South Asia 0.672 0.644 4.2 — 0.959 2.1 0.973 5.0 0.945 Sub-Saharan Africa 0.568 0.553 2.6 — 0.974 0.7 0.991 3.8 0.958 Least developed countries 0.560 0.548 2.1 — 0.978 0.3 0.996 3.6 0.960 Small island developing states 0.739 .. .. — .. 2.7 0.965 .. .. Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 0.916 0.752 17.9 — 0.821 8.2 0.893 22.6 0.750 World 0.756 0.680 10.1 — 0.900 4.5 0.941 12.7 0.859 304 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 TABLE 7 Notes Definitions Main data sources a Based on countries for which a Planetary pressures- Human Development Index (HDI): A composite index measur- Column 1: HDRO calculations based on data from Barro and adjusted Human Development Index value is calculated. ing average achievement in three basic dimensions of human Lee (2018), IMF (2024), UNDESA (2024a), UNESCO Institute for development—a long and healthy life, knowledge and a decent Statistics (2024), United Nations Statistics Division (2025) and standard of living. See Technical note 1 at https://hdr.undp.org/ World Bank (2024a). sites/default/files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_technical_notes.pdf for Column 2: Calculated as the product of the HDI and the details on how the HDI is calculated. adjustment factor presented in column 5. Planetary pressures‑adjusted HDI (PHDI): HDI value adjusted Column 3: Calculated based on data in columns 1 and 2. by the level of carbon dioxide emissions and material footprint per capita to account for the excessive human pressure on Column 4: Calculated based on PHDI ranks and recalculated the planet. It should be seen as an incentive for transforma- HDI ranks for countries for which a PHDI value is calculated. tion. See Technical note 6 at https://hdr.undp.org/sites/default/ Column 5: Calculated based on data in columns 7 and 9. files/2025_HDR/hdr2025_technical_notes.pdf for details on how the PHDI is calculated. Column 6: Global Carbon Project 2024. Difference from HDI value: Percentage difference between Column 7: Calculated based on data in column 6. the PHDI value and the HDI value. Column 8: United Nations Environment Programme 2024. Difference from HDI rank: Difference in ranks on the PHDI and Column 9: Calculated based on data in column 8. the HDI, calculated only for countries for which a PHDI value is calculated. Adjustment factor for planetary pressures: Arithmetic average of the carbon dioxide emissions index and the material footprint index, both defined below. A high value implies less pressure on the planet. Carbon dioxide emissions per capita (production): Carbon dioxide emissions produced as a consequence of human ac- tivities (use of coal, oil and gas for combustion and industrial processes, gas flaring and cement manufacture), divided by midyear population. Values are territorial emissions, meaning that emissions are attributed to the country in which they physi- cally occur. Carbon dioxide emissions (production) index: Carbon dioxide emissions per capita (production-based) expressed as an in- dex using a minimum value of 0 and a maximum value of 76.61 tonnes per capita. A high value on this index implies less pres- sure on the planet. Material footprint per capita: Material footprint is the attribution of global material extraction to a country’s domestic final demand. Total material footprint is the sum of the material footprint for biomass, fossil fuels, metal ores and nonmetal ores. This indicator is calculated as the raw material equivalent of imports plus domestic extraction minus raw material equivalents of exports. Material footprint per capita describes the average material use for final demand. Material footprint index: Material footprint per capita expressed as an index using a minimum value of 0 and a maximum value of 90.27 tonnes per capita. A high value on this index implies less pressure on the planet. TABLE 7 / PLANETARY PRESSURES–ADJUSTED HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX 305 Developing regions Arab States (20 countries or territories) Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, State of Palestine, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates, Yemen East Asia and the Pacific (26 countries) Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, Fiji, Indonesia, Kiribati, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Malaysia, Marshall Islands, Federated States of Micronesia, Mongolia, Myanmar, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Philippines, Samoa, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, Viet Nam Europe and Central Asia (17 countries) Albania, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Republic of Moldova, Montenegro, North Macedonia, Serbia, Tajikistan, Türkiye, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, Uzbekistan Latin America and the Caribbean (33 countries) Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Grenada, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Suriname, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela South Asia (9 countries) Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Islamic Republic of Iran, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka Sub- Saharan Africa (46 countries) Angola, Benin, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Kingdom of Eswatini, Ethiopia, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Namibia, Niger, Nigeria, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South Africa, South Sudan, United Republic of Tanzania, Togo, Uganda, Zambia, Zimbabwe Note: All countries listed in developing regions are included in aggregates for developing countries. Countries included in aggregates for Least Developed Countries and Small Island Developing States follow UN classi- fications, which are available at https://www.un.org/ohrlls/. Countries included in aggregates for Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development are listed at http://www.oecd.org/about/membersandpartners/list -oecd-member-countries.htm. 306 HUMAN DEVELOPMENT REPORT 2025 Statistical references Note: Statistical references relate to statistical material IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2024. World UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). Various presented in this Statistical Annex and in the full set Economic Outlook database. October 2024 Edition. years. Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys. New York. of statistical tables posted at https://hdr.undp.org/en Washington, DC. https://www.imf.org/en/Publications http://mics.unicef.org. Accessed 30 September 2024. /human-development-report-2025. /WEO/weo-database/2024/October. Accessed 5 De- cember 2024. United Nations Statistics Division. 2025. National Barro, R. J., and J.‑W. Lee. 2018. Dataset of Educa- Accounts Main Aggregates Database. http://unstats.un tional Attainment, June 2018 Revision. http://www IPU (Inter‑Parliamentary Union). 2024. Parline da- .org/unsd/snaama. Accessed 17 January 2025. .barrolee.com. Accessed 4 October 2024. tabase: Monthly ranking of women in national parlia- ments. https://data.ipu.org/women-ranking. Accessed UNU‑WIDER (United Nations University World Insti‑ CEDLAS (Center for Distributive, Labor and Social 4 November 2024. tute for Development Economics Research). 2023. Studies) and World Bank. 2024. Socio-Economic World Income Inequality Database (WIID) Companion Database for Latin America and the Caribbean LIS. 2024. Luxembourg Income Study Database. dataset. Version 28 November 2023. https://www (SEDLAC). https://www.cedlas.econo.unlp.edu.ar https://www.lisdatacenter.org/data-access. Accessed .wider.unu.edu/database/world-income-inequality /wp/en/estadisticas/sedlac/estadisticas/. Accessed 30 20 December 2024. - database-wiid#WIIDcomp. Accessed 3 January 2025. December 2024. UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic WHO (World Health Organization), UNICEF (United Eurostat. 2024. European Union Statistics on Income and Social Affairs). 2024a. World Population Pros- Nations Children’s Fund), UNFPA (United Nations and Living Conditions. EU-SILC UDB 2023 – version of pects: The 2024 Revision. New York. https://population Population Fund), World Bank Group and UNDESA/ October 2024. Brussels. https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat .un.org/wpp/. Accessed 1 August 2024. Population Division (United Nations Department of /web/microdata/european-union-statistics-on-income Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division). -and-living-conditions. Accessed 22 January 2025. UNDESA (United Nations Department of Economic 2023. Trends in Maternal Mortality 2000 to 2020: Es- and Social Affairs). 2024b. World Population Pros- timates by WHO, UNICEF, UNFPA, World Bank Group Global Carbon Project. 2024. Global Carbon At- pects: The 2024 Revision. New York. https://population and UNDESA/Population Division. Geneva: World las. https://globalcarbonatlas.org/emissions/carbon .un.org/wpp/ Accessed 14 June 2024 (embargo data). Health Organization. https://www.who.int/publications -emissions/. Accessed 7 January 2025. /i/item/9789240068759. Accessed 4 November 2024. UNEP (United Nations Environment Programme). ICF Macro. Various years. Demographic and Health 2024. International Resource Panel’s Global material World Bank. 2024a. World Development Indicators Surveys. https://dhsprogram.com. Accessed 30 flows database. https://www.resourcepanel.org/global database. Washington, DC. http://data.worldbank.org. September 2024. -material-flows-database. Accessed 7 January 2025. Accessed 2 January 2025. ILO (International Labour Organization). 2024. UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific World Bank. 2024b. World Development Indicators I LOSTAT database. https://ilostat.ilo.org/data/. Ac- and Cultural Organization) Institute for Statistics. database. Washington, DC. http://data.worldbank.org. cessed 10 December 2024. 2024. UIS Developer Portal, Bulk Data Download Accessed 30 May 2024. Service. https://uis.unesco.org/bdds. Accessed 12 Sep- tember 2024. World Inequality Database. 2024. World Inequality Database. http://wid.world. Accessed 2 January 2025. STATISTICAL REFERENCES 307 KEY TO HUMAN DEVELOPMENT INDEX RANKS, 2023 Afghanistan 181 Dominican Republic 89 Liberia 177 Saint Lucia 103 Albania 71 Ecuador 88 Libya 115 Saint Vincent and the Grenadines 76 Algeria 96 Egypt 100 Liechtenstein 17 Samoa 122 Andorra 32 El Salvador 132 Lithuania 39 San Marino 29 Angola 148 Equatorial Guinea 133 Luxembourg 25 Sao Tome and Principe 141 Antigua and Barbuda 53 Eritrea 178 Madagascar 183 Saudi Arabia 37 Argentina 47 Estonia 36 Malawi 172 Senegal 169 Armenia 69 Eswatini (Kingdom of) 126 Malaysia 67 Serbia 62 Australia 7 Ethiopia 180 Maldives 93 Seychelles 54 Austria 22 Fiji 111 Mali 188 Sierra Leone 185 Azerbaijan 81 Finland 12 Malta 24 Singapore 13 Bahamas 66 France 26 Marshall Islands 108 Slovakia 44 Bahrain 38 Gabon 108 Mauritania 163 Slovenia 21 Bangladesh 130 Gambia 170 Mauritius 73 Solomon Islands 156 Barbados 69 Georgia 57 Mexico 81 Somalia 192 Belarus 65 Germany 5 Micronesia (Federated States of) 149 South Africa 106 Belgium 10 Ghana 143 Moldova (Republic of) 86 South Sudan 193 Belize 115 Greece 34 Monaco — Spain 28 Benin 173 Grenada 80 Mongolia 104 Sri Lanka 89 Bhutan 125 Guatemala 137 Montenegro 48 Sudan 176 Bolivia (Plurinational State of) 108 Guinea 179 Morocco 120 Suriname 114 Bosnia and Herzegovina 74 Guinea-Bissau 174 Mozambique 182 Sweden 5 Botswana 111 Guyana 89 Myanmar 150 Switzerland 2 Brazil 84 Haiti 166 Namibia 136 Syrian Arab Republic 162 Brunei Darussalam 60 Honduras 139 Nauru 124 Tajikistan 128 Bulgaria 55 Hong Kong, China (SAR) 8 Nepal 145 Tanzania (United Republic of) 165 Burkina Faso 186 Hungary 46 Netherlands 8 Thailand 76 Burundi 187 Iceland 1 New Zealand 17 Timor-Leste 142 Cabo Verde 135 India 130 Nicaragua 123 Togo 161 Cambodia 151 Indonesia 113 Niger 188 Tonga 92 Cameroon 155 Iran (Islamic Republic of) 75 Nigeria 164 Trinidad and Tobago 72 Canada 16 Iraq 126 North Macedonia 68 Tunisia 105 Central African Republic 191 Ireland 11 Norway 2 Türkiye 51 Chad 190 Israel 27 Oman 50 Turkmenistan 95 Chile 45 Italy 29 Pakistan 168 Tuvalu 129 China 78 Jamaica 117 Palau 84 Uganda 157 Colombia 83 Japan 23 Palestine, State of 133 Ukraine 87 Comoros 152 Jordan 100 Panama 59 United Arab Emirates 15 Congo 138 Kazakhstan 60 Papua New Guinea 160 United Kingdom 13 Congo Kenya 143 (Democratic Republic of the) 171 Paraguay 99 United States 17 Kiribati 140 Costa Rica 62 Peru 79 Uruguay 48 Korea (Democratic People’s Côte d’Ivoire 157 Republic of) — Philippines 117 Uzbekistan 107 Croatia 41 Korea (Republic of) 20 Poland 35 Vanuatu 146 Cuba 97 Kuwait 52 Portugal 40 Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) 121 Cyprus 32 Kyrgyzstan 117 Qatar 43 Viet Nam 93 Czechia 29 Lao People’s Romania 55 Democratic Republic 147 Yemen 184 Denmark 4 Russian Federation 64 Latvia 41 Zambia 154 Djibouti 175 Rwanda 159 Lebanon 102 Zimbabwe 153 Dominica 98 Saint Kitts and Nevis 58 Lesotho 167 United Nations Development Programme ISBN: 9789211576092 One United Nations Plaza New York, NY 10017 www.undp.org People and possibilities in the age of AI A matter of choice